Fig. 8.12 (a) Section of an apple, (b) Almond gametes (to form a zygote) is calledfertilisation (Fig. 8.11). The zygote develops into an embryo. 8.3 F RUITS AND SEED FORMATION After fertilisation, the ovary grows intoa fruit and other parts of the flower fall off. The fruit is the ripened ovary. The seeds develop from the ovules. The seedcontains an embryo enclosed in a protective seed coat. Some fruits are fleshy and juicy such as mango and orange. Some fruits arehard like almonds and walnuts [Fig. 8.12 (a) and (b)]. 8.4 S EED DISPERSAL In nature same kind of plants grow atdifferent places. This happens because seeds are dispersed to different places . Sometimes after a walk through a forest or a field or a park, you may have found seeds or fruits sticking to your clothes.Fig. 8.11 Fertilisation (Zygote formation) Pollen grain (germinating) OvumZygote formation Pollen tube (a)(b)(a) (b) Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 88Did you try to observe how these seeds were clinging to your clothes? What do you think will happen if all seeds of a plant were to fall at the sameplace and grow there? There would besevere competition for sunlight, water, minerals and space. As a result the seeds would not grow into healthy plants.Plants benefit by seed dispersal. It prevents competition between the plant and its own seedlings for sunlight, waterand minerals. It also enables the plants to invade new habitats for wider distribution. Seeds and fruits of plants are carried away by wind, water and animals.Winged seeds such as those of drumstickand maple [Fig. 8.13 (a) and (b)], lightseeds of grasses or hairy seeds of aak(Madar ) and hairy fruit of sunflower [Fig. 8.14 (a), (b)], get blown off with the wind to far away places. Some seeds are dispersed by water. These fruits or seedsusually develop floating ability in the form of spongy or fibrous outer coat as in coconut. Some seeds are dispersed byanimals, especially spiny seeds with hooks which get attached to the bodies of animals and are carried to distantplaces. Examples are Xanthium (Fig. 8.15) and Urena . Some seeds are dispersed when the fruits burst with sudden jerks. The seeds are scattered far from the parent plant. This happens in the case of castor andbalsam. Fig. 8.13 Seeds of (a) drumstick and (b) maple Fig. 8.15 XanthiumFig. 8.14 (a) The hairy fruit of sunflower and (b) hairy seed of madar (aak) Seed Wing (a) (b) (a) (b) Reprint 2024-25 REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS 89 What you have learnt All organisms multiply or reproduce their own kind. In plants there are two modes of reproduction, asexual and sexual. There are several methods of asexual reproduction such as fragmentation, budding, spore formation and vegetative propagation. Sexual reproduction involves the fusion of male and female gametes. In vegetative propagation new plants are produced from differentvegetative parts such as leaves, stems and roots. Flower is the reproductive part of a plant. A flower may be unisexual with either the male or the female reproductiveparts. A