Nutrition in Plants1 In Class VI you learnt that food is essential for all living organisms.You also learnt that carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals arecomponents of food. These componentsof food are called nutrients and are necessary for our body. All living organisms require food. Plants can synthesise food for themselves but animals including humans cannot. They get it from plantsor animals that eat plants. Thus, humans and animals are directly or indirectly dependent on plants. 1.1 M ODE OF NUTRITION IN PLANTS Plants are the only organisms that canprepare food for themselves by using water, carbon dioxide and minerals. The raw materials are present in theirsurroundings. The nutrients enable living organisms to build their bodies, to grow,to repair damaged parts of their bodies and provide the energy to carry out life processes. Nutrition is the mode of taking food by an organism and itsutilisation by the body. The mode ofnutrition in which organisms make food themselves from simple substances is called autotrophic (auto = self; trophos = nourishment) nutrition. Therefore, plants are called autotrophs. Animals and most other organisms take in food prepared by plants. They are called heterotrophs ( heteros = other). Boojho wants to know how plants prepare their own food. Now we may ask where the food factories of plants are located: whetherfood is made in all parts of a plant or only in certain parts? How do plants obtain the raw materials from thesurroundings? How do they transport them to the food factories of plants? 1.2 P HOTOSYNTHESIS — F OOD MAKING PROCESS IN PLANTS Leaves are the food factories of plants.Therefore, all the raw materials must reach the leaf. Water and minerals present in the soil are absorbed by the roots and transported to the leaves. Carbon dioxide from air is taken in Paheli wants to know why our body cannot make food from carbon dioxide, water and minerals like plants do. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 2 Paheli wants to know what is so special about the leaves that they can synthesise food but other parts of the plant cannot.Cells through the tiny pores present on the surface of leaves. These pores aresurrounded by ‘guard cells’. Such pores are called stomata [Fig. 1.2 (c)]. Water and minerals are transported to the leaves by the vessels which run like pipes throughout the root, the stem,the branches and the leaves. They form a continuous path or passage for the nutrients to reach the leaf. They arecalled vessels. You will learn more about transport of materials in plants in Chapter 7.The leaves have a green pigment called chlorophyll . It helps leaves to capture the energy of the sunlight. This energy is used to synthesise (prepare) food from carbon dioxide and water.Since the synthesis of food occurs in the presence of sunlight, it is called photosynthesis (Photo: light; synthesis : to combine). So we find that chlorophyll, sunlight, carbon dioxide and water are necessary to carry out the process ofphotosynthesis. It is a unique process on the earth