soil would you find humus? What is its importance tothe soil? The micro-organisms which convert the dead plants and animals to humusare known as decomposers . These micro-organisms play an important rolein the forest. Soon, Paheli removed somedead leaves and discovered under thema layer of humus on forest floor. The presence of humus ensures that the nutrients of the dead plants andanimals are released into the soil. Fromthere, these nutrients are again absorbedby the roots of the living plants. “Whathappens if an animal dies in the forest?” Sheila asked. Tibu replied the dead animals become food for vultures, crows,jackals and insects.” In this way, thenutrients are cycled. So, nothing goeswaste in a forest (Fig. 12.9). Fig. 12.10 Balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide Paheli reminded their friends that they have studied photosynthesis in Chapter 1. balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere (Fig. 12.10). That is why forests are called lungs. The children saw clouds forming in the sky. Boojho recalled what he hadlearnt about the water cycle in Class VI. Trees take in water from their roots andrelease water vapour into the air through evaporation. If there were fewer trees, how will the water cycle be affected? Tibu told them that the forest is not just home to plants and animals. Many people also live in the forest. Some of Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 149them may belong to different tribes. Tibu explained that these people dependmostly on the forests. The forest provides them with food, shelter, water and medicines. They have traditionalknowledge about many medicinal plants in the forest. While Boojho was drinking water from a small stream, he saw some deer crossing the stream (Fig. 12.11). They disappeared into the bushes. The dense bushes and the tall grass provide animals with the food and shelter. Theyshowed the children droppings of some animals, and explained the difference between various types of droppings. Prof Ahmad informed them that theforest officers could recognise the presence of some animals in the forest by their droppings and footprints. Boojho called every one and showed them a large, decaying heap of animaldropping. Several beetles and grubswere feeding on the heap and a bunch of seedlings was sprouting. “These seedlings are of the herbs and shrubs. Paheli remembered that she saw a Pipal sapling on the sidewall in her school. Can you help her to understand how this would have happened? Fig. 12.12 A sapling on a wall also protect them from carnivores that live in the forest. Tibu then started looking closely at the forest floor. Soon he called andThe animals also disperse the seeds of certain plants and help the forest to growand regenerate. The decaying animaldung also provides nutrients to theseedlings to grow”, said Prof Ahmad. After listening to this, Boojho noted in his notebook, “By harbouring greatervariety of plants, the forest providesgreater opportunities for food andhabitat for the herbivores. Largernumber of herbivores means increased availability of food for a variety ofFig. 12.11 Deer in a forest Reprint