building generally one set of pipes brings clean water and another set of pipes takes away wastewater. Imagine that we could seethrough the ground. We would see a network of big and small pipes, called Table 13.1 Contaminant survey S. No. Type of sewage Point of origin Contaminants Any other remark 1. Sullage water Kitchen 2. Foul waste Toilets 3. Trade waste Industrial and commercial organisations Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 158sewers, forming the sewerage . It is like a transport system that carries sewage from the point of being produced to the point of disposal, i.e. treatment plant. Manholes are located at every 50 m to 60 m in the sewerage, at the junctionof two or more sewers and at points where there is a change in direction. Activity 13.3 Study the sewage route in your home/school/building. Do the following: Make a line diagram of the sewage route. Walk down the street or survey the campus to find the number of manholes. If possible, observe open drain and record which living organisms are found in and around it.In case you do not have a sewerage system in your locality, find out howsewage is being disposed off. Treatment of polluted water Perform the following activity. It will helpyou understand the processes that take place at the wastewater treatment plant. Activity 13.4 Divide yourself into groups to perform the activity. Record observations at eachstage: Fill a large glass jar 3/4 full of water. Add some dirty organic matter suchas grass pieces or orange peels, a small amount of detergent, and a few drops of an ink or any colour.Cap the jar, shake it well and let the mixture stand in the sun for twodays. After two days, shake the mixture and pour a small sample into testtube. Label this test tube “Before treatment; Sample 1”. How does itsmell? Use an aerator from an aquarium tobubble air through the sample in theglass jar. Allow several hours foraeration; leave the aerator attachedovernight. If you do not have anaerator, use a mechanical stirrer or a mixer. You may have to stir it several times. The next day when aeration iscomplete, pour another sample intoa second test tube. Label it as “After aeration; Sample 2”. Fold a piece of filter paper to form acone. Wet the paper with tap waterand then insert the cone in a funnel.Mount the funnel on a support(as you have learnt in Class VI). Place layers of sand, fine gravel and finally medium gravel in the funnel (Fig. 13.2). (An actual filtration plantdoes not use filter paper, but the sandfilter is several metres deep). Pour the remaining aerated liquidthrough the filter into the beakers. Do not allow the liquid to spill over the filter. If the filtered liquid is notclear, filter it a few times till you getclear water. Pour a sample of the filtered waterinto a third test tube labelled “Filtered; Sample 3”. Reprint 2024-25 WASTEWATER STORY 159Pour another sample of the filtered water into a fourth test tube. Add a small