to overgrazing of animals and indiscriminate felling of trees. Prof Ahmad said that if we did things wisely we could preserve forests and environment as well as have development. Children prepared a few pictures to show the consequences of such an event. At the end of the visit, Prof Ahmad asked children to sum up the importance of forests. The children wrote: Forests provide us with oxygen. They protect soil and provide habitat to a large number of animals. Forests help in bringing good rainfall in neighbouring areas. They are a source of medicinal plants, timber and many other useful products. We must preserve our forests. What would happen if forests disappear? Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 152 1 If forests disappear, the amount of carbon dioxide in air will increase, resulting inthe increase of earth’stemperature. 2 In the absence of trees and plants, the animals will notget food and shelter. 3 In the absence of trees, the soil will not hold water, whichwill cause floods. 4 Deforestation will endanger our life and environment.Think, what we can do topreserve our forests. 4 321 Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 153 What you have learnt We get various products from the forests surrounding us. Forest is a system comprising various plants, animals and micro-organisms. In a forest, trees form the uppermost layer, followed by shrubs.The herbs form the lowest layer of vegetation. Different layers of vegetation provide food and shelter for animals,birds and insects. The various components of the forest are interdependent on oneanother. The forest keeps on growing and changing, and can regenerate. In the forest, there is interaction between soil, water, air andliving organisms. Forests protect the soil from erosion. Soil helps forests to grow and regenerate. Forests are the lifeline for the forest-dwelling communities. Forests influence climate, water cycle and air quality. Exercises 1. Explain how animals dwelling in the forest help it grow and regenerate. 2. Explain how forests prevent floods.3. What are decomposers? Name any two of them. What do they do in the forest? 4. Explain the role of forest in maintaining the balance between oxygen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. 5. Explain why there is no waste in a forest.6. List five products we get from forests?Keywords Canopy CrownDecomposersSeed dispersalSoil erosionUnderstoreyDeforestationHumusRegeneration Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 1547. Fill in the blanks: (a) The insects, butterflies, honeybees and birds help flowering plants in . (b) A forest is a purifier of and . (c) Herbs form the layer in the forest. (d) The decaying leaves and animal droppings in a forest enrich the . 8. Why should we worry about the conditions and issues related to forests far from us? 9. Explain why there is a need of variety of animals and plants in a forest. 10. In Fig. 12.15, the artist has forgotten to put the labels and directions on the arrows. Mark the directions on the arrows and label the diagram using the following labels: clouds, rain, atmosphere, carbon dioxide, oxygen, plants, animals, soil, roots, water