slow down? Does yourbody receive sufficient oxygen? Activity 6.3 Figure 6.3 shows the various activitiescarried out by a person during a normalday. Can you say in which activity, the rate of breathing will be the slowest and in which it will be the fastest? Assignnumbers to the pictures in the order of increasing rate of breathing according to your experience. 6.3 H OW DO WE BREATHE ? Let us now learn about the mechanismof breathing. Normally we take in air through our nostrils. When we inhale air, it passes through our nostrils intothe nasal cavity . From the nasal cavity, the air reaches our lungs through the windpipe. Lungs are present in thechest cavity (Fig. 6.4). This cavity is surrounded by ribs on the sides. A large,muscular sheet called diaphragm forms the floor of the chest cavity (Fig. 6.4). Breathing involves the movement of the diaphragm and the rib cage. During inhalation, ribs move up and outwards and diaphragm moves down.This movement increases space in ourchest cavity and air rushes into the lungs. The lungs get filled with air. During exhalation, ribs move down andinwards, while diaphragm moves up to its former position. This reduces the size of the chest cavity and air is pushed outof the lungs (Fig. 6.5). These movements in our body can be felt easily. Take aOn an average, an adult human being at rest breathes in and out 15–18times in a minute. During heavy exercise, the breathing rate can increase upto 25 times per minute.While we exercise, not only do we breathe fast, we also take deep breaths and thus inhale more oxygen. Paheli wants to know why we yawn when we are sleepy or drowsy. Reprint 2024-25 RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 61deep breath. Keep your palm on the abdomen, feel the movement ofabdomen. What do you find? After having learnt that during breathing there are changes in the sizeof the chest cavity, children got involved in the chest expansion competition. Everyone was boasting that she/he Fig 6.4 Human respiratory system The air around us has various types of unwanted particles, such as smoke, dust,pollens, etc. When we inhale, the particles get trapped in the hair present in ournasal cavity. However, sometimes these particles may get past the hair in the nasal cavity. This may irritate the lining of the cavity, as a result of which we sneeze. Sneezing expels these foreign particles from the inhaled air and a dust-free, clean air enters our body. TAKE CARE: When you sneeze, you should cover your nose so that the foreign particles you expel are not inhaled by other persons.Smoking damages lungs. Smoking isalso linked to cancer. It must beavoided. Nasal passage Oral cavityPharynx Trachea Lungs Ribs Diaphragmcould expand it the maximum. How about doing this activity in the classwith your classmates? Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 62 Activity 6.4 Take a deep breath. Measure the size of the chest with a measuring tape (Fig. 6.6) and record your observations in Table 6.2. Measure the size of thechest again when