Reproduction in Plants8 To produce its kind is a characteristic of all living organisms. You have already learnt this in Class VI. The production of new individuals from their parents is known as reproduction. But, how do plants reproduce? There are different modes of reproduction in plants which we shall learn in this chapter. 8.1 M ODES OF REPRODUCTION In Class VI you learnt about different parts of a flowering plant. Try to list thevarious parts of a plant and write the functions of each. Most plants have roots, stems and leaves. These are calledthe vegetative parts of a plant. After a certain period of growth, most plantsbear flowers. You may have seen themango trees flowering in spring. It is these flowers that give rise to juicy mango fruit we enjoy in summer. We eat the fruits and usually discard the seeds. Seeds germinate and form new plants. So, what is the function of flowers in plants? Flowers perform the function of reproduction in plants. Flowers are the reproductive parts . There are several ways by which plants produce their offspring. These are categorised into two types: (i) asexual, and (ii) sexual reproduction. In asexual reproduction plants can give rise to new plants without seeds, whereas in sexualAsexual reproduction In asexual reproduction new plants are obtained without production of seeds. Vegetative propagation It is a type of asexual reproduction in which new plants are produced fromroots, stems, leaves and buds. Since reproduction is through the vegetative parts of the plant, it is known asvegetative propagation. Activity 8.1 Cut a branch of rose or champa with a node. This piece of branch is termed a cutting. Bury the cutting in the soil. Anode is a part of the stem/branch at which a leaf arises (Fig. 8.1). Water the cutting every day and observe itsgrowth. Observe and record the number of days taken for roots to come out and Paheli thought that new plants always grow from seeds. But, she has never seen the seeds of sugarcane, potato and rose. She wants to know how these plants reproduce. reproduction, new plants are obtained from seeds. Reprint 2024-25 REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS 83 new leaves to arise. Try the same activity by growing money plant in a jar of waterand record your observations. Likewise you can also grow ginger (Fig. 8.3) or turmeric. Bryophyllum (sprout leaf plant) has buds in the margins of leaves (Fig. 8.4).If a leaf of this plant falls on a moist You must have seen flower buds developing into flowers. Apart fromflower buds, there are buds in the axil(point of attachment of the leaf at the node) of leaves which develop into shoots. These buds are called vegetativebuds (Fig. 8.2). A bud consists of a short stem around which immature overlapping leaves are present. Vegetative buds can also give rise to new plants. Activity 8.2 Take a fresh potato. Observe the scars on it with the help of a magnifying glass. You may find bud(s) in them. These scarsare also