gases. 8. Tick the correct answer: (a) Cuscuta is an example of: (i) autotroph (ii) parasite (iii) saprotroph (iv) host (b) The plant which traps and feeds on insects is: (i) Cuscuta (ii) china rose (iv) pitcher plant (iv) rose 9. Match the items given in Column I with those in Column II: Column I Column II Chlorophyll Rhizobium Nitrogen Heterotrophs Cuscuta Pitcher plant Animals Leaf Insects Parasite 10. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false: (i) Carbon dioxide is released during photosynthesis. (T/F) (ii) Plants which synthesise their food are called saprotrophs. (T/F) Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 10(iii) The product of photosynthesis is not a protein. (T/F) (iv) Solar energy is converted into chemical energy during photosynthesis. (T/F) 11. Choose the correct option from the following: Which part of the plant takes in carbon dioxide from the air forphotosynthesis? (i) Root hair (ii) Stomata (iii) Leaf veins (iv) Petals 12. Choose the correct option from the following: Plants take carbon dioxide from the atmosphere mainly through their:(i) roots (ii) stem (iii) flowers (iv) leaves 13. Why do farmers grow many fruits and vegetable crops inside large green houses? What are the advantages to the farmers? Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Project Take a potted plant with broad leaves. Take two strips of blackpaper and cut out a small squarein the centres. Cover a part of twoleaves with these papers and securethem with paper clips (Fig. 1.9).Keep the plant in sunlight for 2–5days. Observe the difference in thecolour of the covered and theuncovered portions on the leaf.Perform iodine test on this leaf. Didthe two parts show differentresults? Now take second leaf.Remove the strip and expose the covered part to the sunlight for 2–3days and do the iodine test again. Describe your observations. 2. Visit a green house if there is one near your place. Observe how they grow plants. Find out how they regulate the amount of light, water andcarbon dioxide to grow the plants. 3. Try growing a sweet potato just in water. Describe your experiment and observations.You can read more on the following website:www.phschool.com/science/biology_place/biocoach/photosynth/overview.htmFig. 1.9 Experiment to test the occurrence of photosynthesis Did you know? Light is so important to plants that their leaves grow in many patterns soas to absorb maximum sunlight. Reprint 2024-25