the experts, teachers, even parents, and society at large. The children are required to collect information of various kind and draw conclusions of their own. My request to teachers and parents is to use the book in the spirit in which it has been written. Encourage children to perform activities and learn by doing, rather than by rote. Reprint 2024-25 You can supplement, or even replace, the activities given here. If you feel that you have better alternatives, especially with your local/regional flavour, please write to us so that these activities could be used in the future editions of the book. We have been able to include only a small subset of children’s experiences. You have a better knowledge of their experiences because you are in touch with them. Use them to illustrate the concepts being taught. Above all, please do not stifle children’s natural curiosity. Encourage them to ask questions, even if sometimes you feel uncomfortable. If you do not know the answer to a question on the spot, do not feel embarrassed. You canpromise them to find the answer and deal with it later. Make a genuine attempt to get the answer from whatever resources are within your reach, such as senior school or college teachers, experts, libraries, internet, etc. If, in spite of your efforts, you cannot get the answer to some question, you could write to NCERT. I must thank the NCERT for enabling us to talk to children through the medium of this book. Every member of the NCERT has been courteous and helpful to us. If you find thisbook useful and enjoy teaching/learning science through this book, the Editing Team and I shall consider ourselves well-rewarded. V.B. B HATIA Chief Advisor Textbook Development Committeeviii Reprint 2024-25 TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune CHIEF ADVISOR V.B. Bhatia, Professor, Retd. (Physics), Delhi University, Delhi MEMBERS Bharati Sarkar, Reader, Retd. (Zoology), Maitreyi College, Delhi University, Delhi C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM), NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi D. Lahiry, Professor, Retd, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi G.P. Pande, Uttarakhand Seva Nidhi, Paryavaran Shiksha Sansthan, Jakhan Devi, Almora, Uttaranchal Harsh Kumari, Headmistress, CIE Experimental Basic School, Department of Education, Delhi University, DelhiJ.S. Gill, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi Kamal Deep Peter, TGT (Science), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bengaluru Kanhiya Lal, Principal, Retd., Directorate of Education, Delhi Lalita S. Kumar, Reader (Chemistry), School of Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi Mohd. Iftikhar Alam, TGT (Science), Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya (No.1), Jama Masjid, DelhiP.S. Yadava, Professor, Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University, Imphal R. Joshi, Lecturer (Selection Grade), DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi Rachna Garg, Lecturer, DESM, Central Institute of Educational Technology, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New DelhiRanjana Agrawal, Principal Scientist and Head, Division of Forecasting Techniques, Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute,