any unwashed object in the mouth. Fig. 2.5 Gradual decay of tooth(a) (b) (c) (d) Our mouth has the salivary glands which secrete saliva. Do you know the action of saliva on food? Let us find out. Activity 2.3 Take two test tubes. Label them ‘A’ and ‘B’. In test tube ‘A’ put one teaspoonfulof boiled rice; in test tube ‘B’ keep one teaspoonful of boiled rice after chewingit for 3 to 5 minutes. Add 3–4 mL of water in both the test tubes (Fig. 2.4). Now pour 2–3 drops of iodine solutionin each test tube and observe. Why is there a change in colour in the test tubes? Discuss the results with yourclassmates and your teacher. The saliva breaks down the starch into sugars. The tongue is a fleshy muscular organ attached at the back to the floor of the buccal cavity. It is free at the front and can be moved in all directions. Doyou know the functions of the tongue? We use our tongue for talking. Besides, it mixes saliva with the food duringchewing and helps in swallowing food. We also taste food with our tongue. It has taste buds that detect differenttastes of food. We can find out the AB Reprint 2024-25 NUTRITION IN ANIMALS 15 Paheli wants to know how food moves in the opposite direction during vomiting. Fig. 2.6 Regions of the tongue for different tastes Fig. 2.7 Movement of the food in the oesophagus of the alimentary canalposition of taste buds by the following activity. Activity 2.4 1. Prepare a separate sample each of (i) sugar solution, (ii) common saltsolution, (iii) lemon juice and (iv) juiceof crushed neem leaf or bitter gourd. 2. Blindfold one of your classmates and ask her/him to take out the tongueand keep it in straight and flat position. 3. Use a clean toothpick to put the above samples one by one ondifferent areas of the tongue as shown in Fig. 2.6. Use a new toothpick for each sample. 4. Ask the classmate which areas of the tongue could detect the sweet, salty,sour and bitter substances.5. Now write down your observations and label Fig. 2.6.Repeat this activity with other classmates. The foodpipe/oesophagus The swallowed food passes into thefoodpipe or oesophagus. Look at Fig. 2.2. The foodpipe runs along the neckSometimes when you eat in a hurry, talk or laugh while eating, you may cough, get hiccups or a choking sensation. This happens when food particles enter thewindpipe. The windpipe carries air from the nostrils to the lungs. It runs adjacent to the foodpipe. But inside the throat, air and food share a common passage. Then how is food prevented from entering the windpipe? During the act ofswallowing a flap-like valve closes the passage of the windpipe and guides the food into the foodpipe. If, by chance, food particles enter the windpipe, we feel choked, get hiccups or cough. Food Oesophagus Stomach Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 16The working of the stomach was discovered by a strange accident. In 1822, a man