an interval of 10 seconds. If a distance of 100 metresis shown by 1 cm in these photographs, calculate the speed of thefastest car. 12. Fig. 9.15 shows the distance-time graph for the motion of two vehicles A and B. Which one of them is moving faster? (i) (ii)Fig. 9.15 Distance-time graph for the motion of two cars 13. Which of the following distance-time graphs shows a truck moving with speed which is not constant? Reprint 2024-25 MOTION AND TIME 107Extend Learning — Activities and Projects 1. You can make your own sundial and use it to mark the time of the day at your place. First of all find the latitude of your city with the help of an atlas. Cut out a triangular piece of a cardboard such that its one angleis equal to the latitude of your place and the angle opposite to it is aright angle. Fix this piece, called gnomon , vertically along a diameter of a circular board a shown in Fig. 9.16. One way to fix the gnomon couldbe to make a groove along a diameter on the circular board. Next, select an open space, which receives sunlight for most of the day. Mark a line on the ground along the North-South direction. Place thesundial in the sun as shown in Fig. 9.16. Mark the position of the tip ofthe shadow of the gnomon on the circular board as early in the day aspossible, say 8:00 AM . Mark the position of the tip of the shadow every hour throughout the day. Draw lines to connect each point marked byyou with the centre of the base of the gnomon as shown in Fig. 9.16.Extend the lines on the circular board up to its periphery. You can usethis sundial to read the time of the day at your place. Remember thatthe gnomon should always be placed in the North-South direction asshown in Fig. 9.16. Fig. 9.16(iii) (iv) Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 108Did you know? The time-keeping services in India are provided by the National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi. The clock they use can measure time intervalswith an accuracy of one-millionth of a second. The most accurate clockin the world has been developed by the National Institute of Standardsand Technology in the U.S.A. This clock will lose or gain one second afterrunning for 20 million years.Fig. 9.17 2. Collect information about time-measuring devices that were used in the ancient times in different parts of the world. Prepare a brief write upon each one of them. The write up may include the name of the device,the place of its origin, the period when it was used, the unit in whichthe time was measured by it and a drawing or a photograph of thedevice, if available. 3. Make a model of a sand clock which can measure a time interval of 2 minutes (Fig. 9.17). 4. You can perform an interesting activity when you visit a park to ride a swing. You will require a watch. Make the