. The solar energy is captured by the leaves and stored in the plant in the form of food. Thus, sun is the ultimate source of energy for allliving organisms. Can you imagine life on earth in the absence of photosynthesis! In the absence of photosynthesis there would not be any food. The survival of almost all living organisms directly or indirectly depends upon thefood made by the plants. Besides, oxygen which is essential for the survivalYou have seen that buildings are made of bricks. Similarly, the bodies of living organisms aremade of tiny units called cells. Cells can be seen only under the microscope. Some organismsare made of only one cell. The cell is enclosed bya thin outer boundary, called the cell membrane . Most cells have a distinct, centrally locatedspherical structure called the nucleus (Fig. 1.1).The nucleus is surrounded by a jelly-like substance called cytoplasm . Cell membraneCytoplasmNucleus Fig. 1.1 Cell Boojho wants to know how water and minerals absorbed by roots reach the leaves. Reprint 2024-25 NUTRITION IN PLANTS 3Besides leaves, photosynthesis also takes place in other green parts of the plant — in green stems and green branches. The desert plants have scale- or spine-like leaves to reduce loss of water by transpiration. These plants have green stems which carry out photosynthesis. of all organisms is produced duringphotosynthesis. In the absence ofphotosynthesis, life would be impossible on the earth. During photosynthesis, chlorophyll containing cells of leaves (Fig. 1.2), inthe presence of sunlight, use carbon dioxide and water to synthesisecarbohydrates (Fig. 1.3). The process can be represented in an equation: During the process oxygen is released. The presence of starch in leaves indicates the occurrence of photosynthesis. Starch is also a carbohydrate.   sunlight chlorophyllCarbon dioxide water Carbohydrate oxygen Boojho has observed some plants with deep red, violet or brown leaves. He wants to know whether these leaves also carry out photosynthesis. Activity 1.1 Take two potted plants of the same kind. Keep one in the dark (or in a black box)for 72 hours and the other in sunlight. Fig. 1.2 (a) LeafGuard cells (c) StomaStomatal opening(b) Section of a leaf Fig. 1.3 Diagram showing photosynthesis Light energy Carbon dioxide OxygenChlorophyll in leaf Water and minerals Stoma Guard CellsChlorophyll Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 4Fig. 1.4 Leaves of various colourscarbohydrates are made of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. These are usedto synthesise other components of food such as proteins and fats. But proteins are nitrogenous substances whichcontain nitrogen. From where do the plants obtain nitrogen? Recall that nitrogen is present in abundance in gaseous form in the air.However, plants cannot absorb nitrogen in this form. Soil has certain bacteria thatconvert gaseous nitrogen into a usable form and release it into the soil. These are absorbed by the plants along withwater. Also, you might have seen farmers adding fertilisers rich in nitrogen to the soil. In this way the plants fulfil theirrequirements of nitrogen along with the other constituents. Plants can then synthesise proteins and vitamins. 1.3 O THER MODES