DTP Operators ; and Randhir Thakur , Proof Reader. The contribution of APC-office, administration of DESM, Publication Department and Secretariat of NCERT is also acknowledged.xii Reprint 2024-25 The team of Paheli and Boojho will be with you as you journey through this textbook. They love to ask questions. All kind of questions come to theirminds and they collect them in theirsacks. Sometimes, they may share some of these questions with you, as you read through the chapters. Paheli and Boojho are also on the lookout for answers to many questions — sometimes the questions seem answered after they discussthem with each other, sometimesthrough discussions with other classmates, teachers or their parents. Answers to some questions do notseem available even after all these. They might need to experiment on their own,read books in the library, send questions to scientists. Just dig and dig and dig into all possibilities and see if the questions can be answered. Perhaps, they would carry some of the unanswered questions in their sacks to higher classes. What will really thrill them would be your adding questions to their sacks or answers to their questions. Sometimes, activities are suggested in the textbook, results or findings of these by different groups of students would be of interest to other students and teachers. You can complete the suggested activities and sendyour results or findings to Paheli and Boojho. Do keep in mind that activitiesthat involve using blades, scissors or fire need to be done strictly under the care of your teachers. Stick to the precautions given and then enjoy doing all the suggested activities. Mind, the book will not be able to help you much, if theactivities are not completed! We would like to advise you that you must make observations yourself and record whatever results you get. Keen and true observations are necessary forexploring any subject of study. For somereason your results may turn out to bedifferent from those of your classmates. Do not worry. Try to find out the reason for these results instead of disregardingthem. Do not ever copy results from yourclassmate. You can send your feedback for Paheli and Boojho at:A NOTE FOR THE STUDENTS To The Head Department of Education inScience and Mathematics,NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg,New Delhi 110 016 Reprint 2024-25 CONSTITUTION OF INDIA Fundamental Duties Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India — (a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem; (b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom; (c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so; (e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women; (f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite