Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 40Turmeric is another natural indicator Activity 4.2 Take a tablespoonful of turmeric powder. Add a little water and makea paste. Make turmeric paper by depositingturmeric paste on blotting paper/filterpaper and drying it. Cut thin strips of the yellow paper obtained. Put a drop of soap solution on the strip of turmeric paper. What do you observe?Activity 4.1 Mix some water with lemon juice in aplastic cup/tumbler/test tube. Put a drop of the above solution on astrip of the red litmus paper with thehelp of a dropper. Is there any change in colour? Repeat the same exercise with the blue litmus paper. Note down if there is any change in colour. Perform the same activity with the following substances: Tap water, detergent solution, aerated drink, soap solution, shampoo, common salt solution, sugar solution, vinegar, baking soda solution, milk of magnesia,washing soda solution, lime water. If possible make solutions in distilled water. Record your observations as in Table. 4.2. In your Table, are there any substances on which litmus had no effect? Name those substances. The solutions which do not change the colour of either red or blue litmusare known as neutral solutions. These substances are neither acidic nor basic. To prepare limewater, take some water in a tumbler and add some lime ( chuna) into it. Stir the solution and keep it for some time. Pour a little from the top. This is lime water. Fig. 4.2 Children performing litmus test Table 4.2 S. No. Test solution Effect on red Effect on blue Inference litmus paper litmus paper Reprint 2024-25 ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 41Table 4.3 S. No. Test solution Effect on turmeric solution Remarks 1. Lemon juice 2. Orange juice3. Vinegar4. Milk of magnesia5. Baking soda 6. Lime water 7. Sugar 8. Common saltYou can prepare a greeting card for your mother on her birthday. Apply turmeric paste on a sheet of plane white paper and dry it. Draw abeautiful flower with soap solution with the help of a cotton bud. You will get a beautiful greeting card. Similarly test the solutions listed in Table 4.3 and note down your observations. You may try solutions of other substances also. China Rose as Indicator Activity 4.3 Collect some China rose ( Gudhal ) petals and place them in a beaker. Add someFig. 4.3 China rose flower and indicator prepared from it Acid Base Indicator China rose Now I understand why a turmeric stain on my white shirt is turned to red when it is washed with soap. It is because the soap solution is basic. Turmeric pasteSoap solution Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 42Table 4.4 S. No. Test solution Initial colour Final colour 1. Shampoo (dilute solution) 2. Lemon juice 3. Soda water 4. Sodium hydrogencarbonate solution 5. Vinegar6. Sugar solution7. Common salt solution warm water. Keep the mixture for some time till water becomes coloured. Use the coloured water as an indicator. Add five drops of the indicator to each of thesolutions given in Table 4.4. What is the