TIME 95A simple pendulum consists of a small metallic ball or a piece of stone suspended from a rigid stand by athread [Fig. 9.4 (a)]. The metallic ball is called the bob of the pendulum. Fig. 9.4 (a) shows the pendulum at rest in its mean position. When the bobof the pendulum is released after taking it slightly to one side, it begins to moveto and fro [Fig. 9.4 (b)]. The to and fro motion of a simple pendulum is an example of a periodic or an oscillatorymotion. The pendulum is said to have completed one oscillation when its bob, starting from its mean position O, movesTo set the pendulum in motion, gently hold the bob and move it slightly to one side. Make sure that the string attached to the bob is taut while youdisplace it. Now release the bob from its displaced position. Remember that the bob is not to be pushed when it isreleased. Note the time on the clock when the bob is at its mean position. Instead of the mean position you maynote the time when the bob is at one of its extreme positions. Measure the time the pendulum takes to complete 20oscillations. Record your observationsFig. 9.4 (b) Different positions of the bob of an oscillating simple pendulumFig. 9.4 (a) A simple pendulumto A, to B and back to O. Thependulum also completes oneoscillation when its bob moves from one extreme position A to the other extreme position B andcomes back to A. The time taken by the pendulum to complete one oscillation is called its time period . Activity 9.2 Set up a simple pendulum as shown in Fig. 9.4 (a) with a thread or string of length nearlyone metre. Switch off any fans nearby. Let the bob of the pendulum come to rest at itsmean position. Mark the mean position of the bob on the floor below it or on the wall behind it. To measure the time period of the pendulum we will needa stopwatch. However, if astopwatch is not available, a table clock or a wristwatch can be used.A OB Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 96Table 9.2 Time period of a simple pendulum Length of the string = 100 cm S.No. Time taken for 20 Time period oscillations (s) (s) 1. 42 2.1 2. 3.cells. These clocks are called quartz clocks. The time measured by quartzclocks is much more accurate than that by the clocks available earlier. Units of time and speed The basic unit of time is a second. Its symbol is s. Larger units of time are minutes (min) and hours (h). Youalready know how these units are related to one another. What would be the basic unit of speed? Since the speed is distance/time, the basic unit of speed is m/s. Of course, it could also be expressed in other units such as m/min or km/h. You must remember that the symbols of all units are written insingular . For example, we write 50 km and not 50 kms,