know that the needle of a compass is a tiny magnet, which points in north-south direction. When we bring a magnet close to it, the needle gets deflected. We have also seen thatcompass needle gets deflected when the current flows in a nearby wire. Can you connect the two observations? When thecurrent flows through a wire, does the wire behave like a magnet? This is what a scientist called Hans Christian Oersted (Fig. 10.18) also wondered. He was the first person who noticed the deflection of compass needleevery time the current was passed through the wire. So, when electric current passes through a wire, it behaves like a magnet.This is the magnetic effect of the electric current. In fact, an electric current canbe used to make magnets. Do you find it too surprising? Let us try it out.Remember not to switch on thecurrent for more than a few seconds at a time. The electromagnet weakensthe cell quickly if left connected. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 118the electromagnet. There is a contact screw near the iron strip. When the ironstrip is in contact with the screw, the current flows through the coil which becomes an electromagnet. It, then,pulls the iron strip. In the process, the hammer at the end of the strip strikes the gong of the bell to produce a sound.However, when the electromagnet pulls the iron strip, it also breaks the circuit. The current through the coil stopsflowing. Will the coil remain an electromagnet? The coil is no longer an electromagnet. It no longer attracts the iron strip. Theiron strip comes back to its original position and touches the contact screwagain. This completes the circuit. The current flows in the coil and the hammer strikes the gong again. Thisprocess is repeated in quick succession. The hammer strikes the gong every time the circuit is completed. This is howthe bell rings. Keywords Battery Circuit diagramElectric componentsElectric bellElectromagnetFuseHeating effect of currentMagnetic effect of current What you have learnt It is convenient to represent electric components by symbols. Using these, an electric circuit can be represented by a circuit diagram. When an electric current flows through a wire, the wire gets heated. It isthe heating effect of current. This effect has many applications.the eye. Many toys also have electromagnets inside them. 10.5 E LECTRIC BELL We are quite familiar with an electric bell.It has an electromagnet in it. Let us seehow it works. Fig. 10.20 shows the circuit of an electric bell. It consists of a coil of wirewound on an iron piece. The coil acts as an electromagnet. An iron strip with a hammer at one end is kept close to Fig. 10. 20 Circuit of an electric bell Reprint 2024-25 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS 119 Wires made from some special materials melt quickly and break when large electric currents are passed through them. Thesematerials are used for making electric fuses which prevent firesand damage to electric appliances. When an electric current flows through a wire, it behaves like amagnet. A current