the reflected light. Do you see the slits in the mirror? This is the image of the slits. This activity shows how light gets reflected from a plane mirror. Let us play around with the images formed in mirrors and know a little more about them. Fig. 11.6 Image of a candle in a plane mirrorFig. 11.5 Reflection of light from a mirror Paheli wants to know, what makes things visible to us? Boojho thinks that objects are visible only when light reflected from them reaches our eyes. Do you agree with him? CAUTION Handle the lighted candle with care. It is better if this activity is performed in the presence of a teacher or an elder person. Place a lighted candle in front of a plane mirror. Try to see the flame of the candle in the mirror. It appears as if a similar candle is placed behind the mirror. Thecandle, which appears behind the mirror, is the image of the candle formed by the mirror (Fig. 11.6). The candleitself is the object. Now move the candle to different positions in front of the mirror. Observe the image in each case.Activity 11.2 Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 126 cannot be obtained on the screen in either case. What about the distance of the image from mirror? Let us perform anotheractivity. Activity 11.3 Take a chess board. If a chess board isnot available, draw on a chart paper 64 (8×8) squares of equal size. Draw a thick line in the middle of the paper. Fix a plane mirror vertically on this line. Place any small object, such as a pencil sharpner, at the boundary of the thirdsquare counting from the mirror (Fig. 11.7). Note the position of the image. Now shift the object to theboundary of the fourth square. Again note the position of the image. Did you find any relation between the distanceof the image from the mirror and that of the object in front of it?Was the image upright in each case? Did the flame appear on top of the candle as in the object? Such an image is callederect . An image formed by a plane mirror is erect and of the same size asthe object. Now place a vertical screen behind the mirror. Try to obtain the image ofthe candle on this screen. Can you getthe image on the screen? Now place the screen in front of the mirror. Can you get the image on the screen now? Youwill find that the image of the candle Boojho noted in his notebook: Is it not surprising that my image is of the same size as me whether the mirror is small or large? Fig. 11.7 Locating image in a plane mirror Paheli made a note in her notebook: In a plane mirror the image is formed behind the mirror. It is erect, of the same size and is at the same distance from the mirror as the object is in front of it. You will find that the image