images formed by a concave lens. You will findthat the image formed by a concave lensis always virtual, erect and smaller insize than the object (Fig. 11.27). 11.6 S UNLIGHT — W HITE OR COLOURED ? Have you ever seen a rainbow in the sky? You might have noticed that it appears usually after the rain when theSun is low in the sky. The rainbow is Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT 135 seen as a large arc in the sky with many colours (Fig. 11.28). How many colours are present in a rainbow? When observed carefully, thereare seven colours in a rainbow, though it may not be easy to distinguish all of them. These are — red, orange, yellow,green, blue, indigo and violet. Paheli wants to tell you that you can see a rainbow only when your back is towards the sun. You might have seen that when you blow soap bubbles, they appearcolourful. Similarly, when light is reflected from the surface of a Compact Disk (CD), you see manycolours (Fig. 11.29). On the basis of these experiences, could we say that the sunlight is amixture of different colours? Let us investigate. Activity 11.11 Take a glass prism. Allow a narrow beam of sunlight through a small hole in thewindow of a dark room to fall on one face of the prism. Let the light coming out of the other face of the prism fall on Does this mean that the white light consists of seven colours? Fig. 11.28 A rainbow Fig. 11.29 A CD placed in sun Fig. 11.30 A prism splits a beam of sunlight into seven colours Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 136Fig. 11.31 (a) A disc with seven colours (b) It appears white on rotating a white sheet of paper or on a white wall. What do you observe? Do you see colours similar to those in a rainbow (Fig. 11.30)? This shows that the sunlight consists of seven colours. Thesunlight is said to be white light. This means that the white light consists of seven colours. Try to identify thesecolours and write their names in your notebook. Can we mix these colours to get white light? Let us try. Activity 11.12 Take a circular cardboard disc of about10 cm diameter. Divide this disc intoseven segments. Paint the sevenrainbow colours on these segmentsas shown in Fig. 11.31 (a). You canalso paste, coloured papers onthese segments. Make a small hole at the centre of the disc. Fix the disc loosely on the tip of a refill of aball pen. Ensure that the disc rotatesfreely [Fig. 11.31 (a)]. Rotate the discin the daylight. When the disc isrotated fast, the colours get mixed together and the disc appears to be whitish [Fig. 11.31 (b)]. Sucha disc is popularly known as Newton’sdisc. Paheli has a brilliant idea! She has prepared a small top with a small circular disc with seven rainbow colourspainted on it (Fig. 11.32). When the top rotates it appears nearly white. Fig. 11.32 A top with seven colours Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT