badly. Do not experiment with the electric supply from the mains or agenerator or an inverter. You may get an electric shock, which may be dangerous. Use only electric cells forall the activities suggested here. Notice that the key or switch canbe placed anywhere in the circuit. When the switch is in the ‘ON’ position, the circuit from the positive terminal of the battery tothe negative terminal is complete. The circuit is then said to be closed and the current flows throughoutthe circuit instantly. When the switch is in the ‘OFF’position, the circuit is incomplete.It is said to be open. No current flows through any part of the circuit. Reprint 2024-25 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS 113 position. Does the bulb glow? Touch the bulb. Now move the electric switchto the ‘ON’ position and let the bulb glow for a minute or so. Again touch the bulb. Do you feel any difference? After movingthe switch back to the ‘OFF’ position, touch the bulb again. Activity 10.3 Make a circuit as shown in Fig.10.10. Take about 10 cm long piece of nichromewire and tie it between the nails. (You can get nichrome wire from an electric repair shop or you can use a piece ofdiscarded coil of an electric heater.) Touch the wire. Now switch on the current in the circuit by moving theswitch to the ‘ON’ position. After a fewThe wire gets hot when an electric current passes through it. This is theheating effect of the electric current. Can you think of any electric appliance where the heating effect of the electriccurrent is used? Make a list of such appliances. Fig. 10.10 seconds touch the wire. (Do not hold it for a long time.) Switch off the current. Touch the wire again after a few minutes.You might have seen an electric room heater or an electric heater used forcooking. All these contain a coil of wire. This coil of wire is called an element. You may have noticed that when theseappliances are switched on after CAUTION Do not keep the switch in the ‘ON’ position for a long time, otherwise the cell may become weak very quickly. Boojho could not see element in anelectric iron. Paheli told him thatelectrical appliances, such as immersion heaters, hotplates, irons, geysers, electric kettles, hair dryers,have elements inside them. Have you ever seen the element in any appliance? Fig. 10.11 Element of electric iron Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 114connecting to the electric supply, their elements become red hot and give outheat. The amount of heat produced in a wire depends on its material, length and thickness. Thus, for different requirements, the wires of different materials and different lengths and thicknesses are used. The wires used for making electric circuits do not normally become hot. On the other hand, the elements of some electric appliances become so hot that they are easily visible. The filament of Fig. 10.12 Glowing filament of an electric bulb (incandescent) Incandescent electric bulbs (Fig. 10.12) are often used for lighting but they