Respiration in Organisms6 One day Boojho was eagerly waiting to meet his grandparents who were coming to the town after a year. He was in a real hurry as he wanted to receive them at the bus-stop. He ran fast and reached the bus-stop in a few minutes. He wasbreathing rapidly. His grandmother asked him why he was breathing so fast. Boojho told her that he came running all the way.But the question got stuck in his mind. He wondered why running makes a person breathe faster. The answer toBoojho’s question lies in understanding why we breathe. Breathing is a part of respiration. Let us learn about respiration. 6.1 W HY DO WE RESPIRE ? In Chapter 2 you learnt that all organisms are made of small microscopic units called cells. A cell isthe smallest structural and functional unit of an organism. Each cell of an organism performs certain functionssuch as nutrition, transport, excretion and reproduction. To perform these functions, the cell needs energy. Evenwhen we are eating, sleeping or reading we require energy. But, where does this energy come from? Can you say whyyour parents insist that you should eat regularly? The food has stored energy, which is released during respiration.Therefore, all living organisms respireto get energy from food. During breathing, we breathe in air. You know that air contains oxygen. We breathe outair which is rich in carbon dioxide. The air we breathe in is transported to all parts of the body and ultimately to eachcell. In the cells, oxygen in the air helps in the breakdown of food. The process of breakdown of food in the cell with therelease of energy is called cellular respiration. Cellular respiration takesplace in the cells of all organisms. In the cell, the food (glucose) is broken down into carbon dioxide and water usingoxygen. When breakdown of glucoseoccurs with the use of oxygen it is called aerobic respiration . Food can also be broken down, without using oxygen. This is called anaerobic respiration . Breakdown of food releases energy. You should know that there are some organisms such as yeast that can survivein the absence of air. They are calledanaerobes . They get energy through anaerobic respiration. In the absence ofoxygen, glucose breaks down into alcoholand carbon dioxide, as given below: Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 58 Our muscle cells can also respire anaerobically, but only for a short time, when there is a temporary deficiency of oxygen. During heavy exercise, fast running (Fig. 6.1), cycling, walking formany hours or heavy weight lifting, the demand for energy is high. But the supply of oxygen to produce the energyis limited. Then anaerobic respiration takes places in the muscle cells to fulfil the demand of energy: Fig. 6.1 During exercise, some muscles may respire anaerobicallyHave you ever wondered why you get muscle cramps after heavy exercise? Thecramps occur when muscle cells respire anaerobically. The partial breakdown of glucose produces lactic acid. Theaccumulation of lactic acid causes muscle cramps. We get relief from cramps after ahot water