OF NUTRITION IN PLANTS There are some plants which do not havechlorophyll. They cannot synthesisefood. How do they survive and from where do they derive nutrition? Like humans and animals such plantsdepend on the food produced by other plants. They use the heterotrophic mode of nutrition. Look at Fig. 1.5. Do you see a yellow wiry branched structure twining around the stem and branches of a tree? This is a plant called Cuscuta(Amarbel). It does not have chlorophyll. It takes readymade food from the plant on which it is climbing. The plant onwhich it climbs is called the host. Since it deprives the host of valuable nutrients,You often see slimy, green patches in ponds or stagnant water bodies. Theseare generally formed by the growth oforganisms called algae. Can you guess why algae are green in colour? They contain chlorophyll which gives themthe green colour. Algae can also prepare their own food by photosynthesis. Synthesis of plant food other than carbohydrates You have just learnt that plants synthesise carbohydrates through theprocess of photosynthesis. The Perform iodine test with the leaves ofboth the plants as you did in Class VI.Record your results. Now leave the pot which was earlier kept in the dark, in the sunlight for 3 – 4 days and performthe iodine test again on its leaves. Record your observations in your notebook. The leaves other than green also have chlorophyll. The large amount of red,brown and other pigments mask thegreen colour (Fig. 1.4). Photosynthesis takes place in these leaves also. Reprint 2024-25 NUTRITION IN PLANTS 5Cuscuta is called the parasite . Are we and other animals also a kind of parasites? You should think about it and discuss with your teacher.hair which are directed downwards.When an insect lands in the pitcher, thelid closes and the trapped insect gets entangled into the hair. The lid closes and the insect is trapped. The insect isdigested by the digestive juices secreted in the pitcher and its nutrients are absorbed. Such insect-eating plants arecalled insectivorous plants. Is it possible that such plants do not get all the required nutrients from thesoil in which they grow? Fig. 1.5 Cuscuta (Amarbel) on host plant Paheli wants to know whether mosquitoes, bed bugs, lice and leeches that suck our blood are also parasites. Fig. 1.6 Pitcher plant showing lid and pitcherLeaf modified into pitcherLid Boojho is confused. If the pitcher plant is green and carries out photosynthesis, then why does it feed on insects? Have you seen or heard of plants that can eat animals? There are a few plants which can trap insects and digest them.Is it not amazing? Such plants may be green or of some other colour. Look at the plant in Fig. 1.6. The pitcher-like orjug-like structure is the modified part of leaf. The apex of the leaf forms a lid which can open and close the mouth ofthe pitcher. Inside the pitcher there are1.4 S APROTROPHS You might have seen packets of mushrooms sold in the vegetable Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 6