sulphate CrystalsThis process of depositing a layer of zinc on iron is called galvanisation . The iron pipes we use in our homes to carry waterare galvanised to prevent rusting. You know that ships are made of iron and a part of them remains under water.On the part above water also, waterdrops keep clinging to the ship’s outer surface. Moreover, the water of the sea contains many salts. The salt watermakes the process of rust formation faster. Therefore, ships suffer a lot of damage from rusting in spite of beingformed from their solutions. The processis called crystallisation . It is an example of a physical change. Activity 5.9 (To be performed in the presence of the teacher) Stainless steel is made by mixing ironwith carbon and metals like chromium, nickel and manganese. Itdoes not rust. Oh, that is why my friend Rita is always complaining about iron articles rusting so fast. She lives near the coast. CAUTION Use only dilute sulphuric acid. Be careful while boiling water. painted. So much so, that a fraction of ship’s iron has to be replaced every year. Can you imagine the monetary loss to the world? 5.4 C RYSTALLISATION In Class VI you have learnt that salt canbe obtained by the evaporation of sea water. The salt obtained in this manner is not pure and the shape of its crystalscannot be seen clearly. However, large crystals of pure substances can beTake a cupful of water in a beaker and add a few drops of dilute sulphuric acid. Heat the water. When it startsboiling add copper sulphate powder slowly while stirring continuously (Fig. 5.6). Continue adding coppersulphate powder till no more powder can be dissolved. Filter the solution. Allow it to cool. Do not disturb the solutionwhen it is cooling. Look at the solution after some time. Can you see the crystals of copper sulphate? If not, wait for somemore time. Fig. 5.6 Crystals of copper sulphate Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 54You have learnt about physical and chemical changes. Try to identifychanges that you observe around you as physical or chemical changes. What you have learnt Changes can be of two types, physical and chemical. Physical changes are changes in the physical properties of substances. No new substances are formed in these changes. These changes maybe reversible. In chemical changes new substances are produced. Some substances can be obtained in pure state from their solutions bycrystallisation. Exercises 1. Classify the changes involved in the following processes as physical or chemical changes: (a) Photosynthesis (b) Dissolving sugar in water(c) Burning of coal(d) Melting of wax (e) Beating aluminium to make aluminium foil(f ) Digestion of food 2. State whether the following statements are true or false. In case a statement is false, write the corrected statement in your notebook. (a) Cutting a log of wood into pieces is a chemical change. (True/F alse) (b) Formation of manure from leaves is a physical change. (True/F alse)Keywords Chemical change Chemical reactionCrystallisationGalvanisationPhysical changeRusting Reprint 2024-25 PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 55(c)