part of the small intestine wherethe intestinal juice completes the digestion of all components of the food. The carbohydrates get broken intosimple sugars such as glucose, fats into fatty acids and glycerol, and proteins into amino acids. Absorption in the small intestine The digested food can now pass into the blood vessels in the wall of the intestine.This process is called absorption. The inner walls of the small intestine havethousands of finger-like outgrowths.These are called villi (singular villus). Can you guess what the role of villi couldbe in the intestine? The villi increasethe surface area for absorption of the digested food. Each villus has a network of thin and small blood vessels close toits surface. The surface of the villi absorbs the digested food materials. The absorbed substances are transportedvia the blood vessels to different organs of the body where they are used to build complex substances such as theproteins required by the body. This is called assimilation . In the cells, glucose breaks down with the help of oxygen into carbon dioxide and water, and energy is released. The food thatremains undigested and unabsorbed enters into the large intestine. Large intestine The large intestine is wider and shorterthan small intestine. It is about 1.5 metre in length. Its function is to absorb waterand some salts from the undigested food material. The remaining waste passes into the rectum and remains there assemi-solid faeces. The faecal matter is removed through the anus from time-to-time. This is called egestion. 2.3 D IGESTION IN GRASS-EATING ANIMALS Have you observed cows, buffaloesand other grass-eating animals chewing continuously even when they are not eating? Actually, theyquickly swallow the grass and store it in a part of the stomach called rumen (Fig. 2.9). Here the food gets Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 18 Fig. 2.9 Digestive system of ruminant Boojho wants to know why we cannot digest cellulose like the cattle do. Rumenhelps in digestion of cellulose. Many animals, including humans, cannotdigest cellulose. Animals like horses, rabbit, etc., have a large sac-like structure called Caecum between the oesophagus and the small intestine (Fig. 2.9). The cellulose of the food is digested here by the action of certain bacteria which are not present in humans. So far you have learnt about animals which possess the digestive system. Butthere are many small organisms which do not have a mouth and a digestive system.Then, how do they acquire and digest food? In the section below you will learn another interesting way of food intake. 2.4 F EEDING AND DIGESTION IN AMOEBA Amoeba is a microscopic single-celledorganism found in pond water. Amoebahas a cell membrane, a rounded, dense nucleus and many small bubble-like vacuoles (Fig. 2.10) in its cytoplasm.Amoeba constantly changes its shape and position. It pushes out one, ormore finger-like projections, calledpseudopodia or false feet for movement and capture of food. Paheli wants to know why these animals cannot chew food properly at the time they take it in? partially digested and is called cud. But later the cud returns to