LIGHT 123Light11 You might have seen a beam of sunlight when it enters a room through a narrow opening or a hole. You may have also seen beams of light from the headlamps of scooters, cars and engines of trains [Fig. 11.1 (a)]. Similarly, a beam of light can be seen from a torch. Some of (a) Rail engine Fig. 11.1 Beams of light (b) Light house Fig. 11.2 Looking at a candle through a straight and a bent pipeyou may have seen a beam of searchlightfrom a light house or from an airport tower [Fig. 11.1 (b)]. What do these experiences suggest?11.1 L IGHT TRAVELS ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE Boojho recalls an activity he performedin Class VI. In that activity he looked (a) (b) Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 124Fig. 11.3 Reflection of objects in water at a lighted candle first through a straight pipe and then through a bent pipe (Fig. 11.2). Why was Boojho not able to see the candleflame through a bent pipe? This activity showed that light travels along straight lines. How can we change the path of light? Do you know, whathappens when light falls on apolished or a shiny surface? 11.2 R EFLECTION OF LIGHT One way to change the directionof light is to let it fall on a shiny surface. For example, a shining stainless steel plate or a shiningsteel spoon can change the direction of light. The surface of water can also act like a mirrorand change the path of light. Have you ever seen the reflection of trees or buildings in water(Fig. 11.3)?Any polished or a shiny surface can act as a mirror. What happens whenlight falls on a mirror? You have learnt in Class VI that a mirror changes the direction of light thatfalls on it. This change of direction by a mirror is called reflection of light. Can you recall the activity in which you got the light of a torch reflected from a mirror? Let us perform a similar activity. Activity 11.1 Take a torch. Cover its glass with a chart paper which has three narrow slits asshown in Fig. 11.5. Spread a sheet of Paheli remembers the story of the lion and therabbit from the Panchtantra, in which the rabbit fooled the lion by showing him his reflection in water (Fig. 11.4). Fig. 11.4 Reflection of the lion in water Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT 125chart paper on a smooth wooden board. Fix a plane mirror strip vertically on thechart paper (Fig. 11.5). Now direct the beam of light on the mirror from the torch with slits. Place the torch in sucha way that its light is seen along the chart paper on the board. Now adjust its position so that the light from thetorch strikes the plane mirror at an angle (Fig. 11.5). Does the mirror change the direction of light that falls on it? Now move thetorch slightly to either side. Do you find any change in the direction of reflectedlight?Look into the mirror along the direction of