perpendicular to the line. Note the time at the moment the ball crosses the line and also whenit comes to rest (Fig. 9.6). How much time does the ball take to come to rest? The smallest time interval that can be measured with commonly availableclocks and watches is one second. However, now special clocks are available that can measure time intervals smaller than a second. Some of these clockscan measure time intervals as small as one millionth or even one billionth of a second. You might have heard the terms like microsecond and nanosecond. One microsecond is one millionth of a second. A nanosecond is one billionthof a second. Clocks that measure such small time intervals are used for scientific research. The time measuring devices used in sports can measure time intervals that are one tenth or one hundredth of a second. On the other hand, times ofhistorical events are stated in terms of centuries or millenniums. The ages of stars and planet are often expressed in billions of years. Can you imagine the range of time intervals that we have to deal with? Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 98Measure the distance between the point at which the ball crosses the line and the point where it comes to rest. Youcan use a scale or a measuring tape. Let different groups repeat the activity. Record the measurements inTable 9.3. In each case calculate the speed of the ball. You may now like to compare your speed of walking or cycling with that ofyour friends. You need to know the distance of the school from your homeor from some other point. Each one of you can then measure the time taken to cover that distance and calculate yourspeed. It may be interesting to know who amongst you is the fastest. Speeds of some living organisms are given in Fig. 9.6 Measuring the speed of a ball(a) Sundial at Jantar Mantar, Delhi(b) Sand clock (c) Water clock Fig. 9.5 Some ancient time-measuring devices Reprint 2024-25 MOTION AND TIME 99Table 9.3 Distance moved and time taken by a moving ball Name of the group Distance moved by Time taken (s) Speed = Distance/ the ball (m) Time taken (m/s) Boojho wants to know whether there is any device that measures the speed. Table 9.4, in km/h. You can calculate the speeds in m/s yourself. Rockets, launching satellites into earth’s orbit, often attain speeds up to8 km/s. On the other hand, a tortoise can move only with a speed of about 8 cm/s. Can you calculate how fast is therocket compared with the tortoise? Once you know the speed of an object, you can find the distance movedby it in a given time. All you have to do is to multiply the speed by time. Thus, Distance covered = Speed × Time You can also find the time an object would take to cover a distance while moving with a given speed.You might have seen a meter fitted on top of a scooter or a motorcycle.Similarly,