oxygen with the blood rich in carbon dioxide. To understand the functioning of the circulatory system, start from the rightside of the heart in Fig. 7.3 and follow the arrows. These arrows show thedirection of the blood flow from the heartAorta Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 74to the lungs and back to the heart from where it is pumped to the rest of thebody. Heartbeat The walls of the chambers of the heart are made up of muscles. These muscles contract and relax rhythmically. Thisrhythmic contraction followed by its relaxation constitute a heartbeat. Remember that heartbeats continueevery moment of our life. If you place your hand on the left side of your chest, you can feel your heartbeat. The doctorfeels your heartbeats with the help of an instrument called a stethoscope. A doctor uses the stethoscope as a device to amplify the sound of the heart.It consists of a chest piece that carries a sensitive diaphragm, two ear pieces anda tube joining the parts. Doctors can get clues about the condition of yourheart by listening through a stethoscope. Let us construct a model of a stethoscope with the materials that areavailable around us. Activity 7.2 Take a small funnel of 6–7 cm indiameter. Fix a rubber tube (50 cm long) tightly on the stem of the funnel. Stretch a rubber sheet (or a balloon) on themouth of the funnel and fix it tightly with a rubber band. Put the open end of the tube on one of your ears. Place Table 7.2 Heartbeat and pulse rate Name of student While resting After running (4–5 minutes) Heartbeat Pulse rate Heartbeat Pulse rate Fig. 7.5 Instrument to hear heartbeat (a) Stethoscope (b) Model of stethoscopeChest Piece Ear PieceTube Reprint 2024-25 TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS 75the mouth of the funnel on your chest near the heart. Now try to listencarefully. Do you hear a regular thumping sound ? The sound is that of heart beats. How many times did yourheart beat in a minute ? Count again after running for 4–5 minutes. Compare your observations. Record your own pulse rate and heart beat and that of your friends whileresting and after running and record inTable 7.2. Do you find any relationship between your heart beat and pulse rate? Each heart beat generates one pulse inthe arteries and the pulse rate per minute indicates the rate of heart beat. The rhythmic beating of the various chambers of the heart maintaincirculation of blood and transport of substances to the different parts of thebody. Boojho wonders if sponges and hydra also have blood? Animals such as sponges and Hydra do not possess any circulatory system. The water inwhich they live brings food and oxygenas it enters their bodies. The watercarries away waste materials and carbondioxide as it moves out. Thus, these animals do not need a circulatory fluid like the blood. Let us now learn about the removal of waste other than carbon dioxide. 7.2 E XCRETION IN ANIMALS Recall how carbon dioxide is removed as waste