from the body through the lungs during exhalation. Also recall thatthe undigested food is removed during egestion. Let us now find out how the other waste materials are removed fromthe body. You may wonder where these unwanted materials come from! When our cells perform their functions, certain waste products arereleased. These are toxic and hence need to be removed from the body. Theprocess of removal of wastes produced in the cells of the living organisms is called excretion . The parts involved in excretion form the excretory system . Excretory system in humans The waste which is present in the blood has to be removed from the body. How can this be done? A mechanism to filterthe blood is required. This is done by the blood capillaries in the kidneys . When the blood reaches the two kidneys, it contains both useful and harmful substances. The useful substances are absorbed back into the blood. Thewastes dissolved in water are removed as urine . From the kidneys, the urine goes into the urinary bladder throughThe English physician, William Harvey (A.D.1578–1657), discovered thecirculation of blood. The current opinion in those days was that blood oscillates in the vessels of the body.For his views, Harvey was ridiculed and was called “circulator”. He lost most of his patients. However, beforehe died, Harvey’s idea about circulation was generally accepted as a biological fact. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 76Sometimes a person’s kidneys may stop working due to infection or injury. As a result of kidney failure, waste products start accumulating inthe blood. Such persons cannot survive unless their blood is filtered periodically through an artificialkidney. This process is called dialysis .tube-like ureters . It is stored in the bladder and is passed out through the urinary opening at the end of a muscular tube called urethra (Fig. 7.6). The kindeys, ureters, bladder and urethra form the excretory system. An adult human being normally passes about 1–1.8 L of urine in 24hours. The urine consists of 95% water, 2.5% urea and 2.5% other wasteproducts. We have all experienced that we sweat on a hot summer day. The sweat Paheli wants to know whether other animals also urinate? The way in which waste chemicals are removed from the body of the animal depends on the availabilityof water. Aquatic animals like fishes, excrete cell waste as ammonia which directly dissolves in water. Someland animals like birds, lizards, snakes excrete a semi-solid, white coloured compound (uric acid). Themajor excretory product in humans is urea.Fig. 7.6 Human excretory system Kidney Ureter Urinary bladder Urethracontains water and salts. Boojho has seen that sometimes in summer, whitepatches are formed on our clothes, especially in areas like underarms. These marks are left by salts present inthe sweat. Does sweat serve any other function? We know that the water kept in anearthen pot ( matka ) is cooler. This is because the water evaporates from thepores of the pot, which causes cooling. Urinary opening Reprint 2024-25 TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS 77 Similarly, when we sweat,