SCIENCE 156Wastewater Story13 All of us use water in our homes and make it dirty. Dirty! Are you surprised?Rich in lather, mixed with oil, black– brown water that goes down the drains from sinks, showers, toilets, laundries is dirty. It is called wastewater . This used water should not be wasted. We must clean it up by removing pollutants. Have you ever thought where thewastewater goes and what happens to it? 13.1 W ATER, OUR LIFELINE Clean water is a basic need of human being. Let us make a mindmap of the many uses of clean water. Activity 13.1 (We have given one example of the use of clean water. You can add many more.)Clean water that is fit for use is unfortunatelynot available to all. It has been reported that morethan one billion of people have no access to safe drinking water. This accounts for a largenumber of water-related diseases and even deaths. People even children walk for several kilometres to collect cleanwater. Is it not a serious matter for human dignity? The increasing scarcity of fresh-water due to population growth, pollution,industrial development,mismanagement and other factors. Realising the urgencyof the situation on the World Water Day, on 22 March 2005, the General Assembly of the United Nationsproclaimed the period 2005–2015 as the International Decade for action on “Water for life”. All efforts made during this decade aim to reduce by half the number of people who do not have access to safe drinking water. There has been perceptible progress in the direction of the aim but still thereis a lot to achieve. Cleaning of water is a process of removing pollutants before it enters awater body or is reused. This process ofwastewater treatment is commonly Clean water put to use Drinking Reprint 2024-25 WASTEWATER STORY 157known as “Sewage Treatment” . It takes place in several stages. 13.2 W HAT IS SEWAGE ? Sewage is wastewater released by homes, industries, hospitals, offices and otherusers. It also includes rainwater that has run down the street during a storm or heavy rain. The water that washes offroads and rooftops carries harmful substances with it. Sewage is a liquid waste. Most of it is water, which hasdissolved and suspended impurities. Activity 13.2 Locate an open drain near your home, school or on the roadside and inspect water flowing through it. Record colour, odour and any other observation. Discuss with your friends and your teacher and fill up the following Table 13.1. We know that sewage is a complex mixture containing suspended solids, organic and inorganic impurities, nutrients, saprophytes and disease causing bacteria and other microbes. These include the following. Organic impurities –Human faeces, animal waste,oil, urea (urine), pesticides, herbicides, fruit and vegetable waste, etc. Inorganic impurities – Nitrates, Phosphates,metals. Nutrients – Phosphorus and Nitrogen. Bacteria – Such as vibrio cholera which causes cholera and salmonellaparatyphi which causes typhoid. Other microbes – Such as protozones which cause dysentery. 13.3 W ATER FRESHENS UP — A N EVENTFUL JOURNEY In a home or a public