5 Every day you come across many changes in your surroundings. These changes may involve one or more substances. For example, your mother may ask you to dissolve sugar in water to make a cold drink. Making a sugar solution is a change. Similarly,setting curd from milk is a change. Sometimes milk becomes sour. Souring of milk is a change. Stretched rubberband also represents a change. Make a list of ten changes you have noticed around you. In this chapter we shall perform some activities and study the nature of thesechanges. Broadly, these changes are oftwo kinds, physical and chemical. Fig. 5.1 Paper pieces5.1 P HYSICAL CHANGES Activity 5.1 Cut a piece of paper in four square pieces. Cut each square piece further into four square pieces. Lay these pieceson the floor or a table so that the pieces acquire the shape of the original piece of paper (Fig. 5.1). Obviously, you cannot join the pieces back to make the original piece, but isthere a change in the property of thepaper? Activity 5.2 Collect the chalk dust lying on the floornear the chalkboard in your classroom.Or, crush a small piece of chalk into dust. Add a little water to the dust to make a paste. Roll it into the shape of apiece of chalk. Let it dry. Did you recover chalk from the dust? Activity 5.3 Take some ice in a glass or plastic tumbler. Melt a small portion of ice by placing the tumbler in the sun. You havenow a mixture of ice and water. Now place the tumbler in a freezing mixture (ice plus common salt). Does the water become solid ice once again? Physical and Chemical Changes Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 485.3 and 5.4, water changed its state (from solid to liquid, or from gas to liquid). InActivity 5.5, the hack-saw blade changed colour on heating. Properties such as shape, size, colour and state of a substance are called itsphysical properties . A change in which a substance undergoes a change in its physical properties is called a physical change. A physical change is generallyreversible. In such a change no new substance is formed. Let us now consider the other kind of change. 5.2 C HEMICAL CHANGE A change with which you are quitefamiliar is the rusting of iron. If youleave a piece of iron in the open for some time, it acquires a film of brownish substance. This substance is called rust and the process is called rusting (Fig. 5.2). Iron gates of parks orfarmlands, iron benches kept in lawnsand gardens, almost every article of iron, kept in the open gets rusted. At home you must have seen shovels and spadesgetting rusted when exposed to theActivity 5.4 Boil some water in a container. Do yousee the steam rising from the surface of water? Hold an inverted pan by its handle over the steam at some distancefrom the boiling water. Observe the inner surface of the pan. Do you see any droplet of water there? Activity 5.5 Fig.