or 8 cm and not 8 cms. Boojho is wondering how many seconds there are in a day and how many hours in a year. Can you helphim?in Table 9.2. The first observation shownis just a sample. Your observations couldbe different from this. Repeat this activity a few times and record your observations. By dividing the time takenfor 20 oscillations by 20, get the time taken for one oscillation, or the time period of the pendulum. Is the time period of your pendulum nearly the same in all cases? Note that a slight change in the initial displacement does not affect the time period of your pendulum. Nowadays most clocks or watches have an electric circuit with one or more There is an interesting story about the discovery that the time period of a givenpendulum is constant. You might have heard the name of famous scientist Galileo Galilie (A.D. 1564 –1642). It is said that once Galileo was sitting in achurch. He noticed that a lamp suspended from the ceiling with a chain was moving slowly from one side to the other. He was surprised to find that his pulse beat the same number of times during the interval in which the lampcompleted one oscillation. Galileo experimented with various pendulums to verify his observation. He found that a pendulum of a given length takes always the same time to complete one oscillation. This observation led to thedevelopment of pendulum clocks. Winding clocks and wristwatches were refinements of the pendulum clocks. Reprint 2024-25 MOTION AND TIME 97Different units of time are used depending on the need. For example, it is convenient to express your age in years rather than in days or hours. Similarly, it will not be wise to expressin years the time taken by you to cover the distance between your home and your school. How small or large is a time interval of one second? The time taken in sayingaloud “two thousand and one” is nearbyone second. Verify it by counting aloud from “two thousand and one” to “two thousand and ten”. The pulse of anormal healthy adult at rest beats about 72 times in a minute that is about 12 times in 10 seconds. This rate may beslightly higher for children. Paheli wondered how time was measured when pendulum clocks were not available. Many time measuring devices were used in different parts of the world beforethe pendulum clocks became popular. Sundials, water clocks and sand clocks are some examples of such devices.Different designs of these devices were developed in different parts of the world (Fig. 9.5). 9.4 M EASURING SPEED Having learnt how to measure time anddistance, you can calculate the speed ofan object. Let us find the speed of a ball moving along the ground. Activity 9.3 Draw a straight line on the ground with chalk powder or lime and ask one of your friends to stand 1 to 2 m away from it. Let your friend gently roll a ball alongthe ground in a direction