is released in the process. The breakdown of glucose occurs in the cells of an organism (cellularrespiration). If the food is broken down with the use of oxygen, it is called aerobicrespiration. If the breakdown occurs without the use of oxygen, therespiration is called anaerobic respiration. During heavy exercise when the supply of oxygen to our muscle cells isinsufficient, food breakdown is by anaerobic respiration. Breathing is a part of the process of respiration during which anorganism takes in the oxygen-rich air and gives out air rich in carbondioxide. The respiratory organs for the exchange of gases vary in differentorganisms. During inhalation, our lungs expand and then come back to the originalstate as the air moves out during exhalation. Increased physical activity enhances the rate of breathing. In animals like cow, buffalo, dog and cat the respiratory organs and theprocess of breathing are similar to those in humans. In earthworm, the exchange of gases occurs through the moist skin. Infishes it takes place through gills and in insects through the tracheae. In a plant the roots take in air present in the soil. Leaves have tiny porescalled stomata through which they exchange gases. The breakdown ofglucose in the plant cells is similar to that in other living beings.process. All living organisms need to respire to get the energy neededfor their survival. Keywords Aerobic respiration Anaerobic respirationBreathing rateCellular respirationDiaphragmExhalationGillsLungsInhalationSpiraclesTracheaeRibs Reprint 2024-25 RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 67Exercises 1. Why does an athlete breathe faster and deeper than usual after finishing the race? 2. List the similarities and differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration. 3. Why do we often sneeze when we inhale a lot of dust-laden air? 4. Take three test-tubes. Fill ¾th of each with water. Label them A, B and C. Keep a snail in test-tube A, a water plant in test-tube B and in C, keep snail and plant both. Which test-tube would have the highestconcentration of CO 2? 5. Tick the correct answer: (a) In cockroaches, air enters the body through (i) lungs (ii) gills (iii) spiracles (iv) skin (b) During heavy exercise, we get cramps in the legs due to the accumulation of (i) carbon dioxide (ii) lactic acid (iii) alcohol (iv) water (c) Normal range of breathing rate per minute in an average adult person at rest is: (i) 9–12 (ii) 15–18 (iii) 21–24 (iv) 30–33 (d) During exhalation, the ribs (i) move outwards (ii) move downwards (iii) move upwards (iv) do not move at all 6. Match the items in Column I with those in Column II: Column I Column II (a) Yeast (i)Earthworm (b) Diaphragm (ii) Gills (c) Skin (iii) Alcohol (d) Leaves (iv) Chest cavity (e) Fish (v) Stomata (f) Frog (vi) Lungs and skin (vii) Tracheae Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 687. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false: (i) During heavy exercise the breathing rate of a person slows down. (T/F) (ii)Plants carry out photosynthesis only during the day and respiration only at night. (T/F) (iii) Frogs breathe