it with the colour ofthe sample solution saved separately (Fig. 5.4).colour of the solution from blue to green is due to the formation of ironsulphate, a new substance. The brown deposit on the iron nail is copper, another new substance. We can writethe reaction as: Copper sulphate solution (blue) + Iron  Iron sulphate solution (green) + Copper (brown deposit) Activity 5.8 Take about a teaspoonful of vinegar in a test tube. Add a pinch of baking soda to it. You would hear a hissing soundand see bubbles of a gas coming out. Pass this gas through freshly prepared lime water as shown in Fig. 5.5. What happens to the lime water? Do you see any change in the colour of the solution? Take out the nail or the blade.Has it changed in any way? The changes that you notice are due to a reaction between copper sulphate and iron. The change ofThe change in the test tube is as follows: Vinegar (Acetic acid) + Baking soda (Sodium hydrogencarbonate)  Carbon dioxide + other substances The reaction between carbon dioxide and lime water is as follows:Fig. 5.4 Change in colour of the copper sulphate solution due to reaction with ironCopper sulphate (blue)Iron sulphate (greenish) Reprint 2024-25 PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 51Carbon dioxide (CO2) + Lime water [Ca(OH)2] Calcium Carbonate (CaCO3) + Water (H2O) When carbon dioxide is passed through lime water, calcium carbonate is formed, which makes lime water milky. The turning of lime water into milky is a standard test of carbon dioxide. You will use it in Chapter 6 to show that the air we breathe out is rich in carbon dioxide. In Activities 5.6–5.8, you saw that in each change one or more newsubstances were formed. In Activity 5.6,the ash was the new substance formed when magnesium was burnt in air. In Activity 5.7, the reaction of copper sulphate with iron produced iron sulphate and copper. Both of these are new substances. Copper was depositedon the shaving blade of iron. In Activity 5.8, vinegar and baking soda together produced carbon dioxide, which turnedlime water milky. Can you name the new substance formed in this reaction?A change in which one or more new substances are formed is called a chemical change . A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction . Chemical changes are very important in our lives. All new substances are formed as a result of chemical changes. For example, digestion of food in ourbody, ripening of fruits, fermentation of grapes, etc., happen due to series of chemical changes. A medicine is the endproduct of a chain of chemical reactions. Useful new materials, such as plastics and detergents, are produced bychemical reactions. Indeed, every new material is discovered by studying chemical changes. We have seen that one or more new substances are produced in a chemicalchange. In addition to new products,the following may accompany a chemical change: Heat, light or any other radiation (ultraviolet, for example) may be given off or absorbed. Sound may be