Phloem (d) Transport of water (e) Synthesis of carbohydrates 2. Fill in the blanks. (i) The blood from the heart is transported to all parts of the body by the . (ii) Haemoglobin is present in cells. (iii) Arteries and veins are joined by a network of . (iv) The rhythmic expansion and contraction of the heart is called . (v) The main excretory product in human beings is . (vi) Sweat contains water and . (vii) Kidneys eliminate the waste materials in the liquid form called . (viii) Water reaches great heights in the trees because of suction pull caused by . Reprint 2024-25 TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS 813. Choose the correct option: (a) In plants, water is transported through (i) xylem (ii)phloem (iii) stomata (iv) root hair (b) Water absorption through roots can be increased by keeping the plants (i) in the shade (ii) in dim light (iii) under the fan (iv) covered with a polythene bag 4. Why is transport of materials necessary in a plant or in an animal? Explain. 5. What will happen if there are no platelets in the blood?6. What are stomata? Give two functions of stomata. 7. Does transpiration serve any useful function in the plants? Explain. 8. What are the components of blood?9. Why is blood needed by all the parts of a body? 10. What makes the blood look red?11. Describe the function of the heart. 12. Why is it necessary to excrete waste products? 13. Draw a diagram of the human excretory system and label the various parts. Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Find out about blood groups and their importance. 2. When a person suffers from chest pain, the doctor immediately takes an ECG. Visit a doctor and get information about ECG. You may even look up an encyclopaedia or the internet. Did you know? There is no substitute for blood. If people lose blood from surgery or injuryor if their bodies cannot produce enough blood, there is only one way toget it — through transfusion of blood donated by volunteers. Blood isusually in short supply. Donating blood does not decrease the strength ofthe donors. Reprint 2024-25