the rainy season when thedrains start overflowing. We have to wade through the mud pools on the roads. Most unhygienic and unsanitaryconditions prevail. Flies, mosquitoes and other insects breed in it. You can be an enlightened citizen and approach the municipality or thegram panchayat. Insist that the open drains be covered. If the sewage ofany particular house makes the neighbourhood dirty, you shouldChemicals like paints, solvents, insecticides, motor oil, medicinesmay kill microbes that help purify water. So do not throw them down the drain. Used tealeaves, solid food remains, soft toys, cotton, sanitary towels, etc. should also be thrown in the dustbin(Fig. 13.7). These wastes choke the drains. They do not allow free flow of oxygen. This hampers thedegradation process. Don’t add to the load of WWTP. Paheli wonders how! request them to be more considerate about others’ health. 13.5 B ETTER HOUSEKEEPING PRACTICES One of the ways to minimise or eliminatewaste and pollutants at their source is to see what you are releasing down thedrain. Cooking oil and fats should not be thrown down the drain. They canharden and block the pipes. In an open drain the fats clog the soil pores reducing its effectiveness in filteringwater. Throw oil and fats in the dustbin. Fig. 13.7 Do not throw everything in the sink Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 16213.6 S ANITATION AND DISEASE Poor sanitation and contaminated drinking water is the cause of a large number of diseases. Let us look at our own country. A vast number of our people are still without sewerage facilities. Where dothey relieve themselves? A very large fraction of our people defecates in the open, on dry riverbeds, on railway tracks, near fields and many a time directly in water. Untreated human excreta is a health hazard. It may cause water pollution and soilpollution. Both the surface water and groundwater get polluted. Groundwater is a source of water for wells, tubewells, springs and many rivers. Thus, it becomes the most common route forwater borne diseases. They include cholera, typhoid, polio, meningitis, hepatitis and dysentery. Bhoojo wants to know how sewage is disposed of in an aeroplane. 13.7 A LTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENT FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL To improve sanitation, low cost onsite sewage disposal systems are being encouraged. Examples are septic tanks, chemical toilets, composting pits. Septictanks are suitable for places where there is no sewerage system, for hospitals, isolated buildings or a cluster of 4 to 5houses. Some organisations offer hygienic on-site human waste disposaltechnology. These toilets do not require scavenging. Excreta from the toilet seats flow through covered drains into abiogas plant. The biogas produced is used as a source of energy. 13.8 S ANITATION AT PUBLIC PLACES In our country fairs are organisedperiodically. A large number of people participate in them. In the same wayrailway stations, bus depots, airports, hospitals are very busy places. Thousands of people visit them daily.Large amount of waste is generatedVermi-processing toilet A design of a toilet in which humans excreta is treated by earthworms has beentested in India. It has