Heat3 You know that woollen clothes are made from animal fibres. You also know that cotton clothes are made from plant fibres. We wear woollen clothes during winters when it is cold outside. Woollen clothes keep us warm. We prefer to wear light coloured cottonclothes when it is hot. These give us a feeling of coolness. You might have wondered why particular types ofclothes are suitable for a particular season. In winter you feel cold inside the house. If you come out in the sun, youfeel warm. In summer, you feel hot even inside the house. How do we knowwhether an object is hot or cold? How do we find out how hot or cold an object is? In this chapter we shall try to seekanswers to some of these questions. 3.1 H OT AND COLD In our day-to-day life, we come across a number of objects. Some of them are hotWe see that some objects are cold while some are hot. You also know that some objects are hotter than others while some are colder than others. How do we decide which object is hotter thanthe other? We often do it by touching the objects. But is our sense of touch reliable? Let us find out. Activity 3.1 Take three small tubs/containers. Labelthem as A, B and C. Put cold water in container A and hot water in container Table 3.1: Hot and cold objects Object Cold/Cool Warm/Hot Ice cream  Spoon in a tea cup Fruit juiceHandle of a frying pan Fig. 3.1 Feeling water in three containers(A) (B) (C)and some of them are cold. Tea is hot and ice is cold. List some objects you use commonly in Table 3.1. Mark theseobjects as hot or cold. Do not touch objects which are too hot. Be careful while handling a candle flame or a stove. Make sure that water is not so hot thatyou burn your hand Reprint 2024-25 HEAT 25your hand and examine it carefully. If you do not have a thermometer, request a friend to share it with you. A clinical thermometer looks like the one shownin Fig. 3.2. A clinical thermometer consists of a long, narrow, uniform glass tube. It hasa bulb at one end. This bulb contains mercury. Outside the bulb, a small shining thread of mercury can be seen. If you do not see the mercury thread, rotate the thermometer a bit till you seeit. You will also find a scale on thethermometer. The scale we use is the celsius scale, indicated by °C.Boojho’s confusion shows that we cannot always rely on our sense of touchto decide whether an object is hot or cold. Sometimesit may deceive us. Then, how do we find out how hot an object reallyis? A reliable measure of the hotness of an object is its temperature . Temperature is measured by a device called thermometer . 3.2 M EASURING TEMPERATURE Have you seen a thermometer? Recall that when you or someone else in yourfamily had fever, the temperature