Acids, Bases and Salts4 We use in our daily life a large number of substances such as lemon, tamarind, common salt, sugar and vinegar. Do they have the same taste? Let us recall tastes of some edible substances listed in Table 4.1. If you have not tasted any ofthese substances taste it now and enter the result in Table 4.1.You find that some of these substances taste sour, some taste bitter,some taste sweet and some taste salty. 4.1 A CIDS AND BASES Curd, lemon juice, orange juice and vinegar taste sour. These substancestaste sour because they contain acids . The chemical nature of such substancesis acidic. The word acid comes from the Latin word acere which means sour. The acids in these substances arenatural acids. What about baking soda? Does it also taste sour? If not, what is its taste? Since,it does not taste sour it means, that ithas no acids in it. It is bitter in taste. If you rub it s solution between fingers, it feels soapy. Generally, substances like these which are bitter in taste and feel soapy on touching are known as bases . The nature of such substances is said to be basic . If we cannot taste every substance, how do we find its nature? Special type of substances are used to test whether a substance is acidic orbasic. These substances are known asindicators. The indicators change their colour when added to a solution containing an acidic or a basicsubstance. Turmeric, litmus, China rose petals ( Gudhal ), etc., are some of the naturally occurring indicators.CAUTION 1. Do not taste anything unless asked to do so. 2. Do not touch anything unless asked to do so. Table 4.1 Substance Taste (sour/bitter/ any other) Lemon juice Orange juice VinegarCurdTamarind ( imli) SugarCommon salt Amla Baking sodaGrapesUnripe mango Cucumber Reprint 2024-25 ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 39 (b) Fig. 4.1 (a) Lichens, and (b) Red and blue litmus paper(a)4.2 N ATURAL INDICATORS AROUND US Litmus: A natural dye The most commonly used natural indicator is litmus. It is extractedfrom lichens (Fig. 4.1a). It has a mauve (purple) colour in distilledwater. When added to an acidicsolution, it turns red and when added to a basic solution, it turns blue. It is available in the form of asolution, or in the form of strips of paper, known as litmus paper. Generally, it is available as red andblue litmus paper (Fig. 4.1b). Can I taste all substances to find their taste? No. Have you not read the caution? We should not taste unknown substances. They could harm us. Do you know? Name of acid Found in Acetic acid Vinegar Formic acid Ant’s stingCitric acid Citrus fruits such as oranges, lemons, etc. Lactic acid Curd Oxalic acid Spinach Ascorbic acid Amla , Citrus fruits (Vitamin C)Tartaric acid Tamarind, grapes, unripe mangoes, etc. All the acids mentioned above occur in nature Name of base Found inCalcium hydroxide Lime water Ammonium hydroxide Window cleaner Sodium hydroxide/ SoapPotassium hydroxide Magnesium hydroxide Milk of magnesia