is at the same distance behindthe mirror as the object is in frontof it. Now verify this by placing the object anywhere on the chart paper. Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT 127 Fig. 11.8 Left hand appears on the right side in the imageFig. 11.9 An ambulance mirror. How does it appear in the mirror?11.3 R IGHT OR LEFT! When you see your image in a plane mirror, is it exactly like you? Have you ever noticed that there is one interesting difference between you and your imagein a mirror? Let us find out. Activity 11.4 Stand in front of a plane mirror and lookat your image. Raise your left hand.Which hand does your image raise (Fig. 11.8)? Now touch your right ear. Which ear does your hand touch in yourimage? Observe carefully. You will find that in the mirror the ‘right’ appears ‘left’ and the ‘left’ appears ‘right’. Note thatonly sides are interchanged; the image does not appear upside down. Now write down your name on a piece of paper and hold it in front of a plane Boojho saw an ambulance on the road. He was surprised to see that the word ‘AMBULANCE’ in front was written in a strange manner. Can you now understand why the word ‘AMBULANCE’ is written as in Fig. 11.9 ? When the driver of a vehicle ahead of an ambulance looks in her/his rear view mirror, she/he canread ‘AMBULANCE’ written on it and give way to it. It is the duty of every one of us to allow an ambulance to passwithout blocking its way. You might have observed that in the side mirror of a scooter or a car theimages of all the objects appear smaller than the objects themselves. Have you ever wondered why is it so? Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 12811.4 P LAYING WITH SPHERICAL MIRRORS Paheli and Boojho were waiting for their dinner. Boojho lifted a stainless steel plate and saw his image in it. Oh! This plate acts as a plane mirror. My imageis erect and is of the same size. Paheli saw her image using the back of a steel spoon. “Boojho look here! I can also seemy erect image though it is smaller in size. This spoon also acts as a mirror of some kind”, said Paheli. You can also use a spoon or any curved shining surface to see yourimage. Activity 11.5 Take a stainless steel spoon. Bring the outer side of the spoon near your face and look into it. Do you see your imagein it (Fig. 11.10)? Is this image different from what you see in a plane mirror? Is this image erect? Is the size of the imagethe same, smaller or larger? Fig. 11.10 Image from the outer side of a spoonFig. 11.11 Image from the inner side of a spoon Fig. 11.12 (a) A concave and (b) a convex mirrorNow look at your image using the inner side of the spoon. This time youmay find that your image is erect and larger in