expanded and indicate which classmate shows the maximum expansion of the chest. We can understand the mechanism of breathing by a simple model.Activity 6.5 Take a wide plastic bottle. Remove thebottom. Get a Y-shaped glass or plastic tube. Make a hole in the lid so that the tube may pass through it. To the forkedend of the tube fix two deflated balloons. Introduce the tube into the bottle as shown in Fig. 6.7. Now cap the bottle.Seal it to make it airtight. To the open base of the bottle tie a thin rubber or plastic sheet using a large rubber band. Fig. 6.5 Mechanism of breathing in human beings Table 6.2: Effect of breathing on the chest size of some classmates Name of the Size of the chest (cm) classmate During inhalation During exhalation Difference in sizeRibs move out Diaphragm moves downAir is drawn inAir forced out Ribs moveback Diaphragm moves back (a) Inhalation (b) Exhalation Reprint 2024-25 RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 63Fig. 6.6 Measuring chest size the hole in the lid in such a way that it dips in lime water. Now blow gentlythrough the straw a few times (Fig. 6.8). Is there a change in the appearance of lime water? Can you explain this changeon the basis of what you learnt in Chapter 5? You are aware that air we inhale or exhale is a mixture of gases. What dowe exhale? Do we exhale only carbon dioxide or a mixture of gases along withit? You must have also observed that if you exhale on a mirror, a film of moisture appears on its surface. Fromwhere do these droplets come? To understand the expansion of the lungs, pull the rubber sheet from the base downwards and watch the balloons. Next, push the rubber/plastic sheet upand observe the balloons. Did you see any changes in the balloons? What do the balloons in this model represent? What does the rubber sheetrepresent? Now, you should be able to explain the mechanism of breathing. 6.4 W HAT DO WE BREATHE OUT? Activity 6.6 Take a slender, clean test tube or a glass/plastic bottle. Make a hole in its lid and fix it on the bottle. Pour some freshly prepared lime water in the test-tube. Insert a plastic straw through Plastic bottle Balloons Ruber sheet Fig 6.7 Model to show mechanism of breathing Boojho wants to know how much air a person can hold in the lungs. Breathe for Better Life Regular traditional breathing exercise (pranayama) can increase the capacity oflungs to take in more air. Thus more oxygen can be supplied to the body cells resulting in release of more energy. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 64 Fig.6.9 Tracheal systemTracheae 6.5 B REATHING IN OTHER ANIMALS Animals such as elephants, lions, cows, goats, frogs, lizards, snakes, birds, have lungs in their chest cavities like the human beings. How do other organisms breathe? Do they also have lungs like those of humanbeings? Let us find out.Cockroach: A cockroach has small openings on the sides of its body.