Transportation in Animals and Plants7 You have learnt earlier that all organisms need food, water and oxygen for survival. They need to transport all these to various parts of their body. Further, animals need to transport wastes to parts from where they can be removed. Have youwondered how all this is achieved? Look at Fig. 7.1. Do you see the heart and the blood vessels? They function totransport substances and together form the circulatory system. In this chapter, you shall learn about transport ofsubstances in animals and plants. 7.1 C IRCULATORY SYSTEM Blood What happens when you get a cut on your body? Blood flows out. But what is blood? Blood is the fluid which flows in blood vessels. It transports substances like digested food from the small intestine to the other parts of the body. It carries oxygen from the lungs to the cells of the body. It also transports waste for removal from the body. How does the blood carry various substances? Blood is composed of a fluid, called plasma in which different types of cells are suspended. Heart Vein Artery Why is the colour of blood red? Fig. 7.1 Circulatory system (Arteries are shown in red colour and veins in blue) Reprint 2024-25 TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS 71One type of cells are the red blood cells (RBC) which contain a red pigment called haemoglobin . Haemoglobin binds with oxygen and transports it to all the parts of the body and ultimatelyto all the cells. It will be difficult to provide oxygen efficiently to all the cells of the body without haemoglobin. Thepresence of haemoglobin makes blood appear red. The blood also has white blood cells (WBC) which fight against germs thatmay enter our body. Boojho fell down while playing a game and his knee got injured. Bloodwas coming out from the cut. After some time, he noticed that bleeding hadstopped and a dark red clot had plugged the cut. Boojho was puzzled about this. The clot is formed because of the presence of another type of cells in theblood, called platelets . Blood vessels There are different types of blood vesselsin the body. You know that during inhalation a fresh supply of oxygen fillsthe lungs. Oxygen has to be transported to the rest of the body. Also, the blood picks up the waste materials including carbon dioxide fromthe cells. This blood has to go back to the heart for transport to the lungs forremoval of carbon dioxide as you have learnt in Chapter 6. So, two types of blood vessels, arteries and veins are present in the body. (Fig. 7.1) Arteries carry oxygen-rich blood from the heart to all parts of the body.Since the blood flow is rapid and at ahigh pressure, the arteries have thickelastic walls. Let us perform an activity to study the flow of blood through arteries. Activity 7.1 Place the middle and index finger ofyour right hand on the inner side of your left wrist (Fig. 7.2). Can you feel some throbbing