movements? Why do youthink there is throbbing? This throbbing is called the pulse and it is due to the blood flowing in the arteries.Count the number of pulse beats in one minute. How many pulse beats could you count? The number of beats per minuteis called the pulse rate . A resting person, usually has a pulse rate between 72 and 80 beats per minute. Find other places in your body where you can feel the pulse. Record your own pulse beats per minute and those of your classmates.Insert the values you obtained inTable 7.1 and compare them. Fig. 7.2 Pulse in the wrist Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 72Table 7.1 Pulse rate S. No. Name Pulse per minute 1. 2. 3. 4.5. Paheli explained that the pulmonary artery carries blood from the heart, so it is called an artery and not a vein. It carries carbon dioxide-rich blood to the lungs. Pulmonary vein carries oxygen-rich blood from the lungs to the heart. Veins are the vessels which carry carbon dioxide-rich blood from all parts of the body back to the heart. The veins have thin walls. There are valves presentin veins which allow blood to flow only towards the heart. Refer to Fig. 7.3. Do you see the arteries divide into smaller vessels? On reaching the tissues, they divide further into extremely thin tubes called capillaries . The capillaries join to form veins which empty into the heart. Heart The heart is an organ which beats continuously to act as a pump for the transport of blood, which carries othersubstances with it. Imagine a pump working for years without stopping! Absolutelyimpossible. Yet our heart works like a pump non-stop. Let us now learn about the heart. The heart is located in the chest cavity with its lower tip slightly tiltedtowards the left (Fig. 7.1). Hold yourfingers inwards on your palm. That CapillariesVein ArteryHeartLungs I am confused! I have learnt that an artery always carries oxygen-rich blood. Pulmonary arteryPulmonary vein Fig. 7.3 Schematic diagram of circulation Blood Donation Hundreds of people die due to unavailability of blood. Voluntary blood donation is harmless and painless and can save precious lives. Blood can be donated at hospitals andother places authorised by the government. Donated blood are stored with special care in Blood Banks. Reprint 2024-25 TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS 73makes your fist. Your heart is roughly the size of your fist. What will happen if the blood rich in oxygen and the blood rich in carbondioxide mix with each other? To avoidthis from happening, the heart has fourchambers. The two upper chambers arecalled the atria (singular: atrium) and the two lower chambers are called the ventricles (Fig. 7.4). The partition between the chambers helps to avoid Paheli wonders which side of the heart will have oxygen-rich blood and which side will have carbon dioxide-rich blood. Fig. 7.4 Sections of human heart Vena Cava Right atrium Right ventriclePartition completely separating the twohalvesLeft atrium Left ventriclePulmonary artery Pulmonary vein mixing up of blood rich in