SCIENCE 142Forests: Our Lifeline12 One evening Boojho entered the park with an elderly person. He introduced him to his friends. Prof Ahmad was a scientist working in the university. The children started playing while Prof Ahmad sat on a bench in the corner. He was tired as hehad participated in the golden jubilee celebrations of the town. After a while, the children also came and sat aroundhim. They wanted to know about the celebrations. Prof Ahmad told them that after the cultural programme, thesenior people discussed the town’s unemployment problem. A plan was proposed to put up a factory by clearingan area of the forest just outside the town. This would give the increasing population of the town a chance to getjobs. The children were very surprised when Prof Ahmad told them that many people had objected to this idea.“This is because the forests serve as green lungs and water purifying systems in nature”, Prof Ahmad explained. The children were confused. Prof Ahmadrealised that the children had not visited a forest. The children also wanted to know more about the forest, so theydecided to visit it with Prof Ahmad. 12.1 V ISIT TO A FOREST One Sunday morning, the children packed a few things like a knife, a hand lens, a stick, a notebook and walkedtogether through a forest trail near a village. On their way, they met Tibu, a young boy of their age group, of nearbyvillage, who was taking cattle for grazing along with his aunt. He was very agile, running here and there to keep the herdtogether. When he saw the children, Tibu also started walking along with them, while his aunt went on a differentpath. As soon as they entered the forest Tibu raised his hand and signalled them to keep quiet because noise coulddisturb the animals living in the forest. Tibu then took them to a place at a height to show them the broad view ofthe forest. Children were surprised because they could not see any land (Fig. 12.1). The different treetops hadformed green cover over the land. However, the cover was not uniformly green. The Fig. 12.1 A view of a forest Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 143environment was peaceful and a cool breeze was blowing. This made childrenquite fresh and happy. While coming down, they got excited on hearing a sudden sound of birds andsome noise from the top branches of the trees. Tibu told them to relax since it was a normal phenomenon here.Because of the children’s presence, some monkeys had climbed higher up on the trees where they disturbed the birds.Animals often give this type of warning call to alert other animals. Tibu also told that many other animals like boar,bison, jackals, porcupine, elephants live in the deeper areas of the forest (Fig. 12.2). Prof Ahmad cautionedchildren that they should not go deep into the forest. Boojho and Paheli remembered that they have studied about forests as Fig. 12.2 Some forest animals Fig. 12.3 Forest as habitat an example