12.8). They started making sketches of thesecreatures. The forest floor seemed dark coloured and was covered with a layer of dead and decaying leaves, fruits,seeds, twigs and small herbs. The decaying matter was moist and warm. Children picked up various seeds and leaves for their collection. Walking overthe dead leaf layer on the forest floor was like walking over a spongy carpet! Is the decaying matter always warm? Prof Ahmad suggested that the childrencould perform an activity to get ananswer to this question.Fig. 12.7 Canopy and under storeys in a forest “Would we see similar kind of trees in every forest?”—asked Boojho.Prof Ahmad said, “No, due to different climatic conditions there are variations in the types of trees and other plants.The types of animals also differ from forest to forest.” A few children were busy watching beautiful butterflies fluttering here andthere on the flowers of shrubs and herbs.Understorey Fig. 12.8 Forest floorCanopy Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 147Fig. 12.9 Interrelationship of plant, soil and decomposers in a forest Activity 12.3 Dig a small pit. Put vegetable waste and leaves in it. Cover them with soil. Add some water. After three days, remove the upper layer of the soil. Does the pit feelwarm inside? Paheli asked, “There are so many trees here. Also, there are many forestlike this. What difference will it make if we cut some trees for a factory?” Prof Ahmad said, “You have read about autotrophs, heterotrophs andsaprotrophs. You have learnt how green plants produce food. All animals,whether herbivores or carnivores,depend ultimately on plants for food.Organisms which feed on plants oftenget eaten by other organisms, and so on. For example, grass is eaten by insects, which in turn, is taken by thefrog. The frog is consumed by snakes. This is said to form a food chain: Grass insects frog snake eagle. Many food chains can be found in the forest. All food chains are linked. If any one food chain is disturbed, it affectsother food chains. Every part of the forest is dependent on the other parts. If we remove one component, say trees,all other components would be affected.” Photosynthesis SoilDecomposers Oxygen Carbon dioxide WaterNutrients Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 148Paheli reminded Prof Ahmad that he had not explained why forests are called green lungs. Prof Ahmad explained that plants release oxygen through the process of photosynthesis. The plantshelp to provide oxygen for animal respiration. They also maintain theProf Ahmad asked children to pick up leaves from the forest floor andobserve them under a hand lens. They found tiny mushrooms over the decaying leaves. They also saw an armyof tiny insects, millipedes, ants andbeetle on them. They were wonderinghow these organisms live there. Prof Ahmad explained that apart from these animals which are easily seen, there are several organisms and micro-organisms thatlive in the soil. Paheli wondered whatmushroom and other micro-organismseat. Prof Ahmad replied that they feedupon the dead plant and animal tissues and convert them into a dark coloured substance called humus . In which layer of the