Motion and Time9 In Class VI, you learnt about different types of motions. You learnt that a motion could be along a straight line, it could be circular or periodic. Can you recall these three types of motions? Table 9.1 gives some common examples of motions. Identify the typeof motion in each case.9.1 S LOW OR FAST We know that some vehicles move fasterthan others. Even the same vehicle maymove faster or slower at different times. Make a list of ten objects moving along a straight path. Group the motion ofthese objects as slow and fast. How did you decide which object is moving slow and which one is moving fast? If vehicles are moving on a road in the same direction, we can easily tellwhich one of them is moving faster thanthe other. Let us look at the motion of vehicles moving on a road. Activity 9.1 Look at Fig. 9.1. It shows the position of some vehicles moving on a road inthe same direction at some instant of time. Now look at Fig. 9.2. It shows the position of the same vehicles after sometime. From your observation of the two figures, answer the following questions: Which vehicle is moving the fastest of all? Which one of them is moving theslowest of all? The distance moved by objects in a given interval of time can help us todecide which one is faster or slower. For example, imagine that you have gone tosee off your friend at the bus stand. Suppose you start pedalling your bicycle at the same time as the bus begins toTable 9.1 Some examples of different types of motion Example of Type of motion motion Along a straight line/circular/ periodic Soldiers in a march past Bullock cart moving on a straight road Hands of an athlete in a race Pedal of a bicycle in motion Motion of the Earth around the Sun Motion of a swing Motion of a pendulum It is common experience that the motion of some objects is slow while that of some others is fast. Reprint 2024-25 MOTION AND TIME 93move. The distance covered by you after 5 minutes would be much smaller thanthat covered by the bus. Would you say that the bus is moving faster than the bicycle? We often say that the faster vehicle has a higher speed. In a 100-metre raceit is easy to decide whose speedis the highest. One who takesshortest time to cover the distance of 100 metres has the highest speed. 9.2 S PEED You are probably familiar withthe word speed. In theexamples given above, a higher speed seems to indicate that a given distance has beencovered in a shorter time, or a larger distance covered in a given time. The most convenient way to find out which of the two ormore objects is moving fasteris to compare the distances moved by them in a unit time. Thus, if we know the distancecovered by two buses in one hour, we can tell which one is