bath or a massage. Can youguess why it is so? Hot water bath or massage improves circulation of blood. As a result, the supply of oxygen to themuscle cells increases. The increase in the supply of oxygen results in the complete breakdown of lactic acid intocarbon dioxide and water. 6.2 B REATHING Activity 6.1Yeasts are single-celled organisms.They respire anaerobically and during this process yield alcohol. They are, therefore, used to make wine and beer. CAUTION Do this activity under the supervision of your teacher. Close your nostrils and mouth tightly and look at a watch. What did you feel after some time? How long were you able to keep both of them closed? Note down the time for which you couldhold your breath (Fig. 6.2). So, now you know that you cannot survive for long without breathing. Breathing means taking in air rich in oxygen and giving out air rich incarbon dioxide with the help ofrespiratory organs. The taking in of air rich in oxygen into the body is called inhalation and giving out of air rich in carbon dioxide is known as exhalation. It is a continuous process which goes Reprint 2024-25 RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 59 you like to find out your breathing rate? Do you want to know whether it isconstant or it changes according to the requirement of oxygen by the body? Let us find out by doing the followingactivity. Activity 6.2 Generally we are not aware that we are breathing. However, if you try you can count your rate of breathing. Breathein and out normally. Find out how many times you breathe in and breathe out in a minute? Did you inhale the samenumber of times as you exhaled? Now count your breathing rate (number of breaths/minute) after brisk walk andafter running. Record your breathing rate as soon as you finish and also after complete rest. Tabulate your findingsand compare your breathing rates under different conditions with those of your classmates. From the above activity, you must have realised that whenever a person needs extra energy, he/she breathesfaster. As a result more oxygen is Boojho noticed that when he released his breath after holding it for some time, he had to breathe heavily. Can you tell him why it was so? Fig. 6.2 Holding breathon all the time and throughout the lifeof an organism. The number of times a person breathes in a minute is termed as thebreathing rate . During breathing inhalation and exhalation take place alternately. A breath means one inhalation plus one exhalation. Would Table 6.1 Changes in breathing rate under different conditions Name of the classmate Breathing rate Normal After a brisk After running At rest walk for 10 fast 100 m minutes Self Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 60 Fig. 6.3 Variation in the breathing rate during different activitiessupplied to our cells. It speeds up the breakdown of food and more energy is released. Does this explain why do we feel hungry after aphysical activity? When you feel drowsy, does your breathing rate