Thosewhich feel thinner in the middle thanat the edges are concave lenses [Fig. 11.22 (b)]. Notice that the lenses are transparent and light can passthrough them. CAUTION It is dangerous to look through a lens at the Sun or a bright light. You should also be careful not to focussunlight with a convex lens on any part of your body. Fig. 11.21 A magnifying glass Fig. 11.22 (a) A convex lens and (b) a concave lens(a)(b) Let us play with lenses. Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT 133 It means that we can see the image formed by a lens from the side opposite to that of the object. Activity 11.9 Take a convex lens or magnifying glass. Put it in the path of sunrays. Place a sheet of paper as shown (Fig. 11.23). Adjust the distance between the lens andthe paper till you get a bright spot on the paper. Hold the lens and the paper in this position for a few minutes. Doesthe paper begin to burn? Now replace the convex lens with a concave lens. Do you see a bright spotA convex lens converges (bends inward) the light generally falling on it [Fig. 11.24 (a)]. Therefore, it is called aconverging lens. On the other hand, a concave lens diverges (bends outward) the light and is called a diverging lens[Fig. 11.24 (b)]. (b) on the paper this time, too? Why areyou not getting a bright spot this time? We have seen in the case of mirrors that for different positions of the objectthe nature and size of the image change.Is it true for lenses also? Let us find out. Activity 11.10 Take a convex lens and fix it on a standas you did with the concave mirror. Place it on a table. Place a lighted candle at a distance of about 50 cm from the lens[Fig. 11.25 (a)]. Try to obtain the imageFig. 11.23 Real image of the sun by a convex lens (a) Fig. 11.24 of the candle on a paper screen placedon the other side of the lens. You may have to move the screen towards or away from the lens to get a sharp image ofthe flame. What kind of image did you get? Is it real or virtual? Now vary the distance of the candle from the lens [Fig. 11.25 (b)]. Try toobtain the image of the candle flame every time on the paper screen bymoving it. Record your observations as you did in Activity 11.7 for the concave mirror. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 134 Fig. 11.25 Image by a convex lens for object placed at different distance from it (a) (b) Fig. 11.27 Image formed by a concave lens Fig. 11.26 Virtual image formed by the convex lens Did you get in any position of the object an image which was erect and magnified (Fig. 11.26). Could this image be obtained on a screen? Is the image real or virtual? This is how a convex lensis used as a magnifying glass. In a similar fashion study the