called “eyes” . Cut the potato into small portions, each with an eyeand bury them in the soil. Water thepieces regularly for a few days and observe their progress. What do you find?Fig. 8.1 Stem-cutting of roseFig. 8.2 Potato plant sprouting from an ‘eye’ Fig. 8.3 Ginger with new plants sprouting from it soil, each bud can give rise to a newplant. Roots of some plants can also give rise to new plants. Sweet potato anddahlia are examples. Plants such as cacti produce new plants when their parts get detachedNode Bud in the axil Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 84Activity 8.3 (To be demonstrated by the teacher) Take a piece of yeast cake or yeast powder from a bakery or a chemist shop. Take a pinch of yeast and place it in acontainer with some water. Add a spoonful of sugar and shake to dissolve it. Keep it in the warm part of a room.After an hour, put a drop of this liquid on a glass slide and observe under a microscope. What do you observe? Youmay see the formation of new yeast cells (Fig. 8.5).from the main plant body. Each detached part can grow into a new plant.Fig. 8.4 Leaf of Bryophyllum with buds in the margin Boojho wants to know if there is any advantage of vegetative propagation. Plants produced by vegetative propagation take less time to grow andbear flowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. The new plantsare exact copies of the parent plant, as they are produced from a single parent. Later in this chapter you will learn that plants produced by sexualreproduction have characters of both the parents. Plants produce seeds as a resultof sexual reproduction. Budding You have already learnt about the tiny organisms like yeast can be seen only under a microscope. These grow andmultiply every few hours if sufficient nutrients are made available to them. Remember that yeast is a single-celledorganism. Let us see how they reproduce?The small bulb-like projection coming out from the yeast cell is calleda bud. The bud gradually grows and gets detached from the parent cell and forms a new yeast cell. The new yeast cell grows, matures and produces more yeast cells. Sometimes, another budarises from the bud forming a chain of buds. If this process continues, a large number of yeast cells are produced in ashort time. Fragmentation You might have seen slimy green patches in ponds, or in other stagnant water bodies. These are the algae. When Fig. 8.5 Reproduction in yeast by buddingYeast cellDeveloping budChain of buds New budNew plants Reprint 2024-25 REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS 85 air. As they are very light they can cover long distances. Spores are asexual reproductive bodies. Each spore is covered by ahard protective coat to withstandunfavourable conditions such as high temperature and low humidity. So they can survive for a long time. Underfavourable conditions, a spore germinates and develops into a new individual. Plants such as moss andferns (Fig. 8.8) also reproduce by means of spores. 12.2 S