of a habitat in Class VI(Fig. 12.3). They could see now how the forest provides a home for many animalsand plants. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 144The land where the children were walking was uneven and covered with many trees. Tibu helped them to identify sal, teak, semal , sheesham , neem , palash , fig, khair , amla , bamboo, kachnar (Fig. 12.4). Prof Ahmad pointed out that there are several other trees,shrubs, herbs and grasses in the forest. The forest floor and the trees were alsocovered with different types of creepersand climbers. The sun was barely visible through the leaves of the trees, makingit quite dark inside the forest. Activity 12.1 Observe the various things in your homeand make a list of those which are madefrom material which may have been obtained from the forest. You might have many wooden items on your list like plywood, fuel wood,boxes, paper, matchsticks, and furniture. Do you know that gum, oils,spices, fodder for animals and medicinal plants are also some of the products which we get from the forest (Fig. 12.5).Fig. 12.4 Some forest plants Semal Sheesham Neem Bamboo o Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 145Fig. 12.6 Some crown shapes Based on the products that we get from plants, try to fill Table 12.1. One example of each plant is already given. Fill the table by adding more examples. Sheila wondered who would have planted these trees. Prof Ahmad repliedthat in nature trees produce enough seeds. The forest floor providesfavourable conditions for them to germinate and develop into seedlingsProf Ahmad asked children to look up and observe how the branches of the tall trees look like a roof over the other plants in the forest. He told them that this is called a canopy (Fig. 12.7). Activity 12.2 Visit a forest or a park in yourneighbourhood. Observe the trees and try to identify them. You can take the help of some elders or books on trees.List the characteristics of the trees that you observe, such as the height, shape of leaves, crown, flowers, and fruits. Alsodraw the crowns of some trees. Prof Ahmad pointed out that trees had crowns of different types and sizes.These had created different horizontal layers in the forest. These are known as understoreys (Fig. 12.7). Giant and talltrees constituted the top layer followed by shrubs and tall grasses, and herbs formed the lowest layer. Table 12.1 Plants and their products Gum Timber Medicinal Oil Babool Sheesham Neem Sandalwood Sealing wax GumCatechu Honey Wooden statue Fig. 12.5 Forest products and saplings. Some grow up into trees.He added that branchy part of a tree above the stem is known as the crown of the tree (Fig. 12.6). Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 146They had a close look at the bushes. While doing that their hair and clothes had seeds and thorns clinging to them. They came across numerous insects, spiders, squirrels, ants and variousother small animals on the bark of thetrees, plant leaves and on decaying leaves on the forest floor (Fig.