number of healthy persons. The clinical thermometer is designed to measure the temperature of humanbody only. The temperature of human body normally does not go below 35 oC or above 42oC. That is the reason that this thermometer has the range35 oC to 42oC.Different types of thermometersare used for different purposes.The maximum and minimum temperatures of the previous day, reported in weatherreports, are measured by a thermometer called the maximum -minimum thermometer. CAUTION Do not use a clinical thermometer formeasuring the temperature of any object other than the human body. Also avoid keeping the thermometer inthe sun or near a flame. It may break.this thermometer. Look at itcarefully and note the highest and the lowest temperature it can measure. The range of alaboratory thermometer is generally from –10°C to 110°C (Fig. 3.4). Also, as you did in thecase of the clinical thermometer, find out how much a small division on this thermometerreads. You would need this information to read the thermometer correctly. Let us now learn how this thermometer is used. Activity 3.4 Take some tap water in a beaker or a mug. Dip the thermometer in water so that the bulb isimmersed in water but does not touch the bottom or the sides of the container. Hold thethermometer vertically (Fig. 3.5). Observe the movement of mercury in the thermometer. Wait till themercury thread becomes steady. Fig. 3.4 A laboratory thermometer3.3 L ABORATORY THERMOMETER How do we measure the temperature ofother objects? For this purpose, thereare other thermometers. One such thermometer is known as the laboratory thermometer. The teacher will show you Boojho got a naughty idea. He wanted to measure the temperature of hot milk using a clinical thermometer. Paheli stopped him from doing so. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 28Are there any variations in the readings? Discuss the possible reasons. Let us try to answer this question. Activity 3.5 Take some hot water in a beaker or amug. Dip the thermometer in water. Wait till the mercury thread becomessteady and note the temperature. Now take out the thermometer from water. Observe carefully what happens now.Do you notice that as soon as you take the thermometer out of water, the level of mercury begins to fall. This meansthat the temperature must be read while the thermometer is in water. You may recall that while taking your own temperature, you have to take thethermometer out of your mouth to note the reading. Can you then use thelaboratory thermometer to measure yourIn addition to the precautions to be taken while reading a clinical thermometer, the laboratory thermometer should be kept upright not tilted. (Fig. 3.5) bulb should be surrounded from all sides by the substance of which the temperature is to be measured. The bulb should not touch the surface of the container. Fig. 3.5 Measuring temperature of water with a laboratory thermometer Boojho now understands why clinical thermometer cannot be used to measure high temperatures. But still wonders whether a laboratory thermometer can be used to measure his body temperature. Note the