was measured by a thermometer. The thermometer that measures our bodytemperature is called a clinical thermometer . Hold the thermometer inFig. 3.2 A clinical thermom- eter A clinical thermometer reads temperature from 35°C to 42°C. Activity 3.2 Reading a thermometer Let us learn how to read a thermometer. First, note the temperature differenceindicated between the two bigger marks. Also note down the number of divisionsB. Mix some cold and hot water in container C. Now dip your left hand in container A and the right hand in container B. After keeping the hands inthe two containers for 2–3 minutes, put both the hands simultaneously in container C (Fig. 3.1). Do both thehands get the same feeling? Boojho wondered which of the two scales shown in Fig. 3.2 he should read. Paheli told him that India has adopted the celsius scale and we should read that scale. The other scale with the range 94–108 degrees is the Fahrenheit scale (°F). It was in use earlier. Boojho says,“My left hand tells me that the water in mug C is hot and the right hand tells me that the same water is cold. What should I conclude?” Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 26 Precautions to be observed while using a clinical thermometer Thermometer should be washed before and after use, preferably with an antiseptic solution. Ensure that before use the mercury level is below 35°C. Read the thermometer keeping the level of mercury along the line of sight.(See Fig. 3.3). Handle the thermometer with care. If it hits against some hard object, it can break. Don’t hold the thermometer by the bulb while reading it. (shown by smaller marks) between thesemarks. Suppose the bigger marks read one degree and there are five divisionsbetween them. Then, one small division can read 10.2 C5 . Wash the thermometer, preferably with an antiseptic solution. Hold it firmly and give it a few jerks. The jerks will bring the level of mercury down.Ensure that it falls below 35°C. Now place the bulb of the thermometer Fig. 3.3 Correct method of reading a clinical thermometerunder your tongue. After one minute, take the thermometer out and note thereading. This is your body temperature. The temperature should always be stated with its unit, °C. What did you record as your body temperature? The normal temperature of human body is 37°C. Note that the temperature is stated with its unit. Let us try to assure Paheli that there is nothing wrong with her. Activity 3.3 Measure the body temperature of someof your friends (at least 10) with a Table 3.2: Body temperature of some persons Name Temperature (°C) Paheli measured her body temperature. She got worried as it was not exactly 37°C. Reprint 2024-25 HEAT 27 clinical thermometer. Record your observations as in Table 3.2. Is the body temperature of every person 37°C? The temperature of every person may not be 37°C. It could be slightly higher or slightly lower. Actually, what we call normal temperature is the average bodytemperature of a large