table. 11. Which of the following is not a forest product? (i) Gum (ii)Plywood (iii) Sealing wax (iv) Kerosene 12. Which of the following statements is not correct? (i) Forests protect the soil from erosion. (ii) Plants and animals in a forest are not depedent on oneanother. (iii) Forests influence the climate and watercycle. (iv) Soil helps forests to grow and regenerate. Fig. 12.15 Carbon dioxide Oxygen Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 15513. Micro-organisms act upon the dead plants to produce (i) sand (ii) mushrooms (iii) humus (iv) wood Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. The Department of Environment is to decide whether some portion of a forest in your area could be cleared for a housing complex. Write a letter to the department explaining your point of view as a concerned citizen. 2. Visit a forest. Here is a list of points that would make your visit more fruitful. (a) Make sure that you have permission to go into the forest. (b) Make sure that you can find your way around. Get a map and go along with some one who is familiar with the area. (c) Keep a record of the things you see and do. Observations make the visit interesting. Sketches and photographs are useful. (d) You may record bird calls. (e) Collect different kinds of seeds or hard fruits like nuts. (f ) Try to recognise various types of trees, shrubs, herbs, etc. Make lists of plants from different places in the forest and of different layers. You may not be able to name all the plants, but it is worthrecording and seeing where they grow. Make a record ofapproximate heights of plants, crown shape, bark texture, leafsize, and flower colour. (g) Learn to recognise the animal’s droppings. (h) Interview the forest officials and the people of surrounding vil lages and other visitors. You must never collect birds’ eggs, and their nests should never bedisturbed. You can read more on the following website:www.wild-india.com Did you know? In India the area under forest cover is about 21% of the total area. It had steadily been falling since independence. But people now seem to haverealised the importance of the forest cover. Reports suggest that the areaunder forest cover has slightly increased in recent years. Reprint 2024-25