5.2 Rusting ironCAUTION Be careful while handling a flame. Hold a used hack-saw blade with a pair of tongs. Keep the tip of the free end of the blade on the gas stove. Wait for a few minutes. Does the colour of the tip of the blade change? Remove the blade from the flame. Observe the tip once again after some time. Does it get back its original colour?In Activities 5.1 and 5.2 above, you saw that paper and a piece of chalk underwent changes in size. In Activities Reprint 2024-25 PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 49light (Fig. 5.3). When it is completely burnt it leaves behind a powdery ash. Does the ash look like the magnesium ribbon? The change can be represented by the following equation: Magnesium (Mg) + Oxygen (O2)  Magnesium oxide (MgO) Fig. 5.3 Magnesium ribbon burning atmosphere for some time. In thekitchen, a wet iron pan ( tawa ) often gets rusted if left in that state for some time. Rust is not iron. It is different from iron on which it gets deposited. Let us consider a few more changes where new substances are formed. Activity 5.6 (To be demonstrated by the teacher) CAUTION It is dangerous to look for long at the burning magnesium ribbon. The teachers should advise children notto stare at the burning ribbon. Get a small piece of a thin strip or ribbon of magnesium. Clean its tip with sandpaper. Bring the tip near a candle flame. It burns with a brilliant whiteCollect the ash and mix it with a small amount of water. Stir the mixture(aqueous solution) well. Test the mixturewith blue and red litmus papers. Does the mixture turn red litmus blue? Does the mixture turn blue litmus red? On the basis of this test, how do you classify the aqueous solution — acidic or basic? On dissolving the ash in water it forms a new substance. This change canbe written in the form of the following equation: Magnesium oxide (MgO) + Water (H 2O) Magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH)2] As you have already learnt in Chapter 4, magnesium hydroxide is a base. So, magnesium oxide is a new substance formed on burning of magnesium.Magnesium hydroxide is another newThe equations here are different from those in mathematics. In equations of this kind, the arrow implies‘becomes’. No attempt should be made to balance chemical equations at this stage. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 50 substance formed by mixing magnesium oxide with water. Activity 5.7 (To be demonstrated by the teacher)Dissolve about a teaspoonful of copper sulphate (blue vitriol or neela thotha ) in about half a cup of water in a glass tumbler or a beaker. Add a few drops of dilute sulphuric acid to the solution. You should get a blue coloured solution.Save a small sample of the solution in a test tube or a small glass bottle. Drop a nail or a used shaving blade into theremaining solution. Wait for half an hour or so. Observe the colour of the solution. Compare