market. You may have also seen fluffy umbrella-like patches growing in moistsoils or on rotting wood during the rainy season (Fig. 1.7). Let us find out what type of nutrients they need to surviveand from where they get them. Boojho wants to know how these organisms acquire nutrients. They do not have mouths like animals do. They are not like green plants as they lack chlorophyll and cannot make food by photosynthesis. Activity 1.2 Take a piece of bread and moisten it with water. Leave it in a moist warm place for 2–3 days or until fluffy patchesappear on them (Fig. 1.8). What is the colour of these patches? Observe the patches under a microscope or amagnifying glass. Write down your observations in the notebook. You will see cotton-like threads spread on thepiece of bread. Paheli is keen to know whether her beautiful shoes, which she wore on special occasions, were spoiled by fungi during the rainy season. She wants to know how fungi appear suddenly during the rainy season. These organisms are called fungi . They have a different mode of nutrition.They absorb the nutrients from thebread. This mode of nutrition in which organisms take in nutrients from dead and decaying matter is calledsaprotrophic nutrition . Such organisms with saprotrophic mode of nutrition arecalled saprotrophs . Fungi also grow on pickles, leather, clothes and other articles that are leftin hot and humid weather for long time.During the rainy season they spoil many things. Ask your parents about the menace of fungi in your house. The fungal spores are generally present in the air. When they land onFig. 1.8 Fungi growing on bread Fig. 1.7 Packet of mushrooms, a mushroom growing on decayed material Reprint 2024-25 NUTRITION IN PLANTS 71.5 H OW NUTRIENTS ARE REPLENISHED IN THE SOIL Have you seen farmers spreading manure or fertilisers in the fields, or gardeners using them in lawns or in pots? Do you know why this is done? You learnt that plants absorb minerals and nutrients from the soil.So, their amounts in the soil keep ondeclining. Fertilisers and manures contain nutrients such as nitrogen, potassium, phosphorous, etc. Thesenutrients need to be added from time to time to enrich the soil. We can grow plants and keep them healthy ifwe can fulfil the nutrient requirement of plants. Usually crop plants absorb a lot of nitrogen and the soil becomes deficientin nitrogen. You learnt that though nitrogen gas is available in plenty in theair, plants cannot use it in the manner they can use carbon dioxide. They need nitrogen in a soluble form. Thebacterium called Rhizobium can take atmospheric nitrogen and convert it intoa usable form. But Rhizobium cannot make its own food. So it often lives in the roots of gram, peas, moong, beans and other legumes and provides them with nitrogen. In return, the plants provide food and shelter to the bacteria. They, thus, have asymbiotic relationship. This association is of great significance for the farmers. They can reduce the use ofnitrogenous fertiliser