Otherinsects also have similar openings. Boojho wants to know if cockroaches, snails, fish, earthworms, ants and mosquitoes also have lungs. These openings are called spiracles (Fig. 6 .9). Insects have a network of air tubes called tracheae for gas exchange. Oxygen rich air rushes through spiraclesinto the tracheal tubes, diffuses into thebody tissue, and reaches every cell of the body. Similarly, carbon dioxide from the cells goes into the tracheal tubes andmoves out through spiracles. These air tubes or tracheae are found only in insects and not in any other group ofanimals. Fig. 6.8 Effect of exhaled air on lime water The percentage of oxygen and carbondioxide in inhaled and exhaled air. Inhaled air Exhaled air Lungs21% oxygen 16.4% oxygen 4.4% carbon dioxide0.04% carbondioxideStraw Lime water Earthworm: Recall from Chapter 6 of Class VI that earthworms breathe through their skins. The skin of an earthworm feels moist and slimy ontouching. Gases can easily pass through them. Though frogs have a pair of lungs like human beings, they can alsobreathe through their skin, which is moist and slippery. Reprint 2024-25 RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 65 Gills Fig. 6.10 Breathing organs in fish Paheli wants to know whether roots, which are underground also take in oxygen? If so, how? dioxide. In the cells oxygen is used tobreak down glucose into carbon dioxideand water as in other organisms. In plants each part can independently take in oxygen from the air and give outcarbon dioxide. You have already learnt in Chapter 1 that the leaves of the plants have tiny pores called stomata forexchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Soil particles Root hair Air space Fig. 6.11 Roots absorb air from the soil6.6 B REATHING UNDER WATER Can we breathe and survive in water? There are many organisms which live in water. How do they breathe under water? You have studied in Class VI that gills in fish help them to use oxygendissolved in water. Gills are projections of the skin. You may wonder how gillshelp in breathing. Gills are well supplied with blood vessels (Fig. 6.10) for exchange of gases. Boojho has seen in televisionprogrammes that whales and dolphins often come up to the water surface. They even release a fountain of water sometimes while moving upwards. Why do they do so? 6.7 D O PLANTS ALSO RESPIRE ? Like other living organisms, plants also respire for their survival as you have learnt in Class VI. They also take inoxygen from the air and give out carbonLike all other living cells of the plants, the root cells also needoxygen to generate energy. Roots takeup air from the air spaces present between the soil particles (Fig. 6.11). Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 66Can you guess what would happen if a potted plant is overwatered? In this chapter you learnt that respiration is a vital biological What you have learnt Respiration is essential for survival of living organisms. It releases energy from the food. The oxygen we inhale is used to breakdown glucose into carbon dioxideand water. Energy