it helps to cool our body. 7.3 T RANSPORT OF SUBSTANCES IN PLANTS In Chapter 1 you learnt that plants takewater and mineral nutrients from the soilthrough the roots and transport it to the leaves. The leaves prepare food for the plant, using water and carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. You also learnt in Chapter 6 that food is the source of energy and every cell of an organism gets energyby the breakdown of glucose. The cells use this energy to carry out vital activitiesof life. Therefore food must be madeavailable to every cell of an organism. Have you ever wondered how water and nutrients absorbed by the root aretransported to the leaves? How is the food prepared by the leaves carried to the parts which cannot make food? Transport of water and minerals Plants absorb water and minerals by the roots. The roots have root hair.The root hair increase the surface areaof the root for the absorption of waterand mineral nutrients dissolved in water. The root hair is in contact with the water present between the soilparticles [Fig. 7.7 (a)]. Can you guess how water moves from the root to the leaves? What kindof transport system is present in plants? Boojho thinks that plants may have pipes to transport water to the entire plant like we have in our homes for the supply of water. (a)(b) Xylem vesselsFig. 7.7 Transport of water and minerals in (a) a section of root, (b) a treeRoot hair Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 78 Well, Boojho is right. Plants have pipe-like vessels to transport water and nutrients from the soil. The vessels are made of special cells, forming the vascular tissue . A tissue is a group of cells that perform specialised function in an organism. The vascular tissue for the transport of water and nutrients in theplant is called the xylem [Fig. 7.7 (a)]. The xylem forms a continuous network of channels that connects rootsto the leaves through the stem and branches and thus transports water to the entire plant [Fig. 7.7 (b)]. Paheli says her mother puts ladyfinger and other vegetables in water if they are somewhat dry. She wants to know how water enters into them. Boojho wants to know why plants absorb a large quantity of water from the soil, then give it off by transpiration! Fig. 7.8 (a) Stem placed in coloured water Does any part of the herb appear red? If yes, how do you think the colourreached there? You can cut the stem across and look for the red colour inside the stem(Fig. 7.8(b) and 7.8(c)). From this activity we see that water moves up the stem. In other words, stemconducts water. Just like the red ink,minerals dissolved in water also move up the stem, along with water. Water and minerals go to leaves and otherplant parts, through narrow tubes (xylem) inside the stem (Fig. 7.7(b)).You know that leaves synthesise food. The food has to be transported to all parts of the plant. This is done by the vascular