named Alexis St. Martin was badly hit by a shot gun. The bullet had seriously damaged the chest wall and made a holein his stomach. He was brought to an American army doctor William Beaumont. The doctor saved the patient but he could not close the hole properlyand left it bandaged (Fig. 2.8). Beaumont took it as a great opportunity to see the inside of the stomach through the hole. He made some wonderfulobservations. Beaumont found that the stomach was churning food. Its wall secreted a fluid which could digestthe food. He also observed that the end of the stomach opens into the intestine only after the digestion of the food inside the stomach is completed. and the chest. Food is pushed down by movement of the wall of the foodpipe.Actually this movement takes place throughout the alimentary canal and pushes the food downwards (Fig. 2.7).At times the food is not accepted by our stomach and is vomited out. Recall the instances when you vomited after eatingand think of the reason for it. Discuss with your parents and teacher. The stomach The stomach is a thick-walled bag. Itsshape is like a flattened J and it is the widest part of the alimentary canal. Itreceives food from the food pipe at one end and opens into the small intestine at the other. The inner lining of the stomach secretes mucous, hydrochloric acid anddigestive juices. The mucous protectsthe lining of the stomach. The acid kills many bacteria that enter along with thefood and makes the medium in the stomach acidic and helps the digestivejuices to act. The digestive juices break down the proteins into simpler substances. The small intestine The small intestine is highly coiled and is about 7.5 metres long. It receivessecretions from the liver and the pancreas. Besides, its wall also secretes juices. The liver is a reddish brown gland situated in the upper part of theabdomen on the right side. It is the largest gland in the body. It secretes bile juice that is stored in a sac called the gall bladder (Fig. 2.2). The bile plays an important role in the digestion of fats. The pancreas is a large cream coloured gland located just below thestomach (Fig. 2.2). The pancreatic juiceacts on carbohydrates, fats and proteins and changes them into simpler forms. Fig. 2.8 Alexis St. Martin’s shotgun wound Reprint 2024-25 NUTRITION IN ANIMALS 17Diarrhoea Sometime you may have experienced the need to pass watery stool frequently. This condition is known as diarrhoea. It may be caused by an infection, food poisoning or indigestion. It is very common in India, particularly among children. Under severe conditions it can be fatal. This is because of the excessive loss of water and salts from the body. Diarrhoea should not be neglected. Even before a doctor is consulted the patient should be given plenty of boiled and cooled waterwith a pinch of salt and sugar dissolved in it. This is called Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS).The partly digested food now reaches thelower