2024-25 SCIENCE 150 carnivores. The wide variety of animals helps the forest to regenerate and grow. Decomposers help in maintaining the supply of nutrients to the growing plants in the forest. Therefore, the forest is a ‘dynamic living entity ’ — full of life and vitality.” It was about afternoon and the children wanted to go back. Tibusuggested another route for going back.While they were going back, it started raining. However, surprisingly, they saw that the raindrops were not hitting the forest floor directly. The uppermost layer of the forest canopy intercepted the flow of raindrops, and most of the water was coming down through the branches and the stems of the trees. From the leaves itFig. 12.13 Rainwater drips from the trees and seeps into the groundCovered ground with decaying material actslike a spongeRain The root system helpswater to seep down inthe groundThe closed canopy andmany layers of vegetationslow down the speed ofraindropsTranspiration and evaporation Root system Water table Reprint 2024-25 FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 151was dripping slowly over branches of the shrubs and herbs (Fig. 12.13). They found that the ground was still dry. After about half an hour, the rain stopped. They noticed that the layer of dead leaves over the forest floor appeared wet now. But water did not stagnate in the forest. Boojho thought that if it had rained so heavily in his town, it would have flooded the drains and roads. What would happen if it rains heavily in your town? Prof Ahmad told them that the forest also acts as a natural absorber of rainwater and allows it to seep. It helps maintain the water table throughout the year. Forests not only help in controlling floods but also help maintain the flow of water in the streams so that we get a steady supply of water. On the other hand, if trees are not present, rain hits the ground directly and may flood the area around it. Heavy rain may also damages the soil. Roots of trees normally bind the soil together, but in their absence the soil is washed away or eroded. The children spent an hour at Tibu’s village on their way back. The weather of the village was quite pleasant. Villagers told them that due to the surrounding forest, they receive good rainfall. The air also remained cool. Noise pollution, too is less because the forest absorbs the noise of the nearby highway. The children learnt about the history of the village. It surprised them that the villages and the agricultural fields ofthat area were created after clearing the forest about sixty years ago. Tibu’s grandfather told them that when he was young, the village was not as large as it was now. It was also surrounded by forests. Construction of roads, buildings, industrial development and increasing demand of wood created pressure on the forests and it started vanishing. He was not happy that the forest adjoining their village is not regenerating and is on the verge of disappearing due