have Learnt The distance moved by an object in a unit time is called its speed. Speed of objects help us to decide which one is moving faster than the other. The speed of an object is the distance travelled divided by the time takento cover that distance. Its basic unit is metre per second (m/s). Periodic events are used for the measurement of time. Periodic motion ofa pendulum has been used to make clocks and watches. Motion of objects can be presented in pictorial form by theirdistance-time graphs. The distance-time graph for the motion of an object moving with a constantspeed is a straight line. Reprint 2024-25 MOTION AND TIME 105Exercises 1. Classify the following as motion along a straight line, circular or oscillatory motion: (i) Motion of your hands while running. (ii) Motion of a horse pulling a cart on a straight road. (iii) Motion of a child in a merry-go-round. (iv) Motion of a child on a see-saw. (v) Motion of the hammer of an electric bell. (vi) Motion of a train on a straight bridge. 2. Which of the following are not correct? (i) The basic unit of time is second. (ii) Every object moves with a constant speed. (iii) Distances between two cities are measured in kilometres. (iv) The time period of a given pendulum is constant. (v) The speed of a train is expressed in m/h. 3. A simple pendulum takes 32 s to complete 20 oscillations. What is the time period of the pendulum? 4. The distance between two stations is 240 km. A train takes 4 hours to cover this distance. Calculate the speed of the train. 5. The odometer of a car reads 57321.0 km when the clock shows the time 08:30 AM. What is the distance moved by the car, if at 08:50 AM, the odometer reading has changed to 57336.0 km? Calculate the speed ofthe car in km/min during this time. Express the speed in km/h also. 6. Salma takes 15 minutes from her house to reach her school on a bicycle. If the bicycle has a speed of 2 m/s, calculate the distancebetween her house and the school. 7. Show the shape of the distance-time graph for the motion in the following cases: (i) A car moving with a constant speed. (ii) A car parked on a side road. 8. Which of the following relations is correct? (i) Speed = Distance × Time (ii) Speed = Distance Time (iii) Speed = Time Distance(iv) Speed = 1 Distance Time  Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 1069. The basic unit of speed is: (i) km/min (ii)m/min (iii) km/h (iv) m/s 10. A car moves with a speed of 40 km/h for 15 minutes and then with a speed of 60 km/h for the next 15 minutes. The total distance covered by the car is: (i) 100 km (ii) 25 km (iii) 15 km (iv) 10 km 11. Suppose the two photographs, shown in Fig. 9.1 and Fig. 9.2, had been taken at