Discuss why wearing more layers of clothing during winter keeps us warmer than wearing just one thick piece of clothing . 6. Look at Fig. 3.13. Mark where the heat is being transferred by conduction, by convection and by radiation. Fig. 3.13 7. In places of hot climate it is advised that the outer walls of houses be painted white. Explain. 8. One litre of water at 30°C is mixed with one litre of water at 50°C. The temperature of the mixture will be (a) 80°C (b) more than 50°C but less than 80°C (c) 20°C (d) between 30°C and 50°C Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 369. An iron ball at 40°C is dropped in a mug containing water at 40°C. The heat will (a) flow from iron ball to water. (b) not flow from iron ball to water or from water to iron ball. (c) flow from water to iron ball. (d) increase the temperature of both. 10. A wooden spoon is dipped in a cup of ice cream. Its other end (a) becomes cold by the process of conduction.(b) becomes cold by the process of convection. (c) becomes cold by the process of radiation. (d) does not become cold. 11. Stainless steel pans are usually provided with copper bottoms. The reason for this could be that (a) copper bottom makes the pan more durable.(b) such pans appear colourful. (c) copper is a better conductor of heat than the stainless steel. (d) copper is easier to clean than the stainless steel. Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Go to a doctor or your nearest health centre. Observe the doctor taking temperature of patients. Enquire: (a) why she dips the thermometer in a liquid before use.(b) why the thermometer is kept under the tongue. (c) whether the body temperature can be measured by keeping the thermometer at some place other than the mouth. (d) whether the temperature of different parts of the body is the same or different. You can add more questions which come to your mind. 2. Go to a veterinary doctor (a doctor who treats animals). Discuss and find out the normal temperature of domestic animals and birds. 3. Wrap a thin paper strip tightly around an iron rod. Try to burn the paper with candle while rotating the iron rod continuously. Does it burn? Explain your observation. Reprint 2024-25 HEAT 374. Take a sheet of paper. Draw a spiral on it as shown in the Fig. 3.14. Cut out the paper along the line. Suspend the paper as shown in Fig. 3.14 above a lighted candle. Observe what happens. Think of an explanation. Fig. 3.14 Did you know? The celsius scale was devised by a Swedish astronomer, Anders Celsiusin 1742. Strangely, he fixed the temperature of the boiling water as 0°Cand of freezing water as 100°C. However, this order was reversed verysoon.5. Take two similar transparent glass bottles having wide mouths. Put a few crystals of potassium permanganate or pour a few drops of ink in one