also give heat. It means that a part of electricity consumed is used in producing heat. This is not desirable as it results in the wastage of electricity. The fluorescenttube-lights and compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) are better electricity efficient lighting sources. Nowadays, the use of light emitting diode (LED) bulbs is increasing. For producing a given intensity of light, LED bulbs consume lesselectricity as compared to incandescent bulbs or fluorescent tubes or CFLs.Thus LED bulbs are much electricity efficient and therefore being preferred. Fig. 10.13 Electric bulb, tube-light, CFL and LED It is advised to use electrical appliances and gadgets, which are electricity efficient. Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi assigns a Standard Mark on products, called ISI mark which is an assurance of conformity to the specifications given on the products. It is therefore suggested to use ISI mark products. Note: Fluorescent tubes and CFLs contain mercury vapour, toxic in nature. Therefore, damaged fluorescent tubes or CFLs need to be disposed off safely. Reprint 2024-25 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS 115One reason for excessive currents in electrical circuits is the direct touching of wires. This may happen if the insulation on the wires has comeoff due to wear and tear. This may cause a short circuit. Another reason for excessive current can be theconnection of many devices to a single socket. This may cause overload in the circuit. You might have readreports in newspapers about fires caused by short circuits and overloads.buildings fuses are inserted in all electrical circuits. There is a maximum limit on the current which can safelyflow through a circuit. If by accident the current exceeds this safe limit, the wiresan electric bulb gets heated to such a high temperature that it starts glowing. If a large current passes through a wire, the wire may become so hot that it may even melt and break. But is it possible for a wire to melt and break? Let us check it out. Activity 10.4 Make the circuit we used for Activity 10.3 again. However, replace the cell with a battery of four cells. Also, in place ofthe nichrome wire, tie a thin strand of steel wool. (The steel wool is commonly used for cleaning utensils and isavailable in grocery shops.) If there are any fans in the room, switch them off. Now pass the current through the circuitfor sometime. Observe the strand of steel wool carefully. Note what happens. Does the strand of steel wool melt and break? Wires made from some special materials melt quickly and break whenlarge electric currents are passedthrough them. These wires are used for making electric fuses (Fig.10.14). In allCAUTION Never try to investigate an electric fuse connected to mains circuit on yourown. You may, however, visit an electric repair shop and compare the burnt out fuses with the new ones.Fig. 10.15 Fuses used in electrical appliances Fig. 10.14 Fuse used in buildings may become overheated and may causefire. If a proper fuse is there in the circuit,it will blow off and