Electric Current and its Effects10 You might have tried the game ‘How steady is your hand?’ suggested in Chapter 9 of Class VI. If not, you may try it out now. Paheli and Boojho had also set up the game by connecting an electric circuit as suggested in Class VI. They had lotsof fun trying it out with their families and friends. They enjoyed it so much that they decided to suggest it to acousin of theirs who stayed in a different town. So, Paheli made a neat drawing showing how the variouselectric components were to be connected (Fig.10.1). Fig. 10.1 Setup to check how steady your hand is Can you draw this circuit conveniently? It made Boojho wonder ifthere was an easier way to represent these electric components.10.1 S YMBOLS OF ELECTRIC COMPONENTS Some common electric components canbe represented by symbols. In Table 10.1, some electric components and their symbols are shown. You may come across different symbols for thesecomponents in different books. However, in this book, we shall be using the symbols shown here. Look at the symbols carefully. In the symbol for the electric cell, notice thatthere is a longer line and a shorter butthicker parallel line. Do you recall that an electric cell has a positive terminal and a negative terminal? In the symbolof the electric cell, the longer line represents the positive terminal and the thicker, shorter line represents thenegative terminal. For a switch the ‘ON’ position and the ‘OFF’ position are represented by thesymbols as shown. The wires used to connect the various components in a circuit are represented by lines. In Table 10.1, a battery and its symbol are also shown. Do you knowwhat a battery is? Look at the symbol of a battery. Can you make out what a battery could be? For some of the activities we may need more than onecell. So, we connect two or more cells together as shown in Fig.10.2. Notice Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 110Many devices such as torches, transistors, toys, TV remote controls, use batteries. However, in some of these devices the electric cells are not always placed one after the other as shown inFig. 10.2. Sometimes the cells are placed side by side. Then how are the terminals of the cells connected? Look carefullyinside the battery compartment of any device. There is usually a thick wire or a metal strip connecting the positiveterminal of one cell to the negative terminal of the next cell (Fig.10.3). In order to help you to place the cellscorrectly in the battery compartment, ‘+’ and ‘–’ symbols are usually printed there. How can we connect the cells to prepare batteries for our activities? Youmay make a cell holder, as shown inFig.10.4, using a wooden block, two iron strips and rubber bands. It is necessary Fig. 10.3 Connecting two cells together to make a battery Fig. 10.2 (a) A battery of two cells (b) A battery of four cells(a)(b)Table 10.1 Symbols for some electric circuit components S.No. Electric component Symbol 1.