of the digestivetract. The mouth and buccal cavity Food is taken into the body through themouth. The process of taking food into Fig. 2.2 Human digestive systemBuccal cavity Salivary gland Stomach Pancreas Small intestine Largeintestine Rectum AnusGall bladderLiverOesophagus Reprint 2024-25 NUTRITION IN ANIMALS 13 Fig. 2.3 Arrangement of teeth and different type of teethMilk teeth and permanent teeth Do you remember about falling of your teeth some years ago? The first set of teeth grows during infancy and they fall off at the age between six to eightyears. These are termed milk teeth . The second set that replaces them are the permanent teeth . The permanent teeth may last throughout life or fall off during old age or due to some dental disease. the body is called ingestion . We chew the food with the teeth and break itdown mechanically into small pieces.Each tooth is rooted in a separate socket in the gums (Fig. 2.3). Our teeth vary in appearance and perform differentfunctions. Accordingly they are given different names (Fig. 2.3). Activity 2.2 Wash your hands. Look into the mirror and count your teeth. Use your index finger to feel the teeth. How many kinds of teeth could youfind? Take a piece of an apple or bread and eat it. Which teeth do you use for biting and cutting, andwhich ones for piercing and tearing? Also find out the ones that are used for chewing and grinding? Record your observations in Table 2.2 Boojho is fascinated by the highly coiled small intestine seen in Fig. 2.2. He wants to know its length. Would you like to make a wild guess? We have given its approximate length on page 16. Just imagine how such a long structure is accommodated in a small space within our body! Type of teeth Number of teeth Total Lower jaw Upper jaw Cutting and biting teeth Piercing and tearing teethChewing and grinding teethTable 2.2 Molar CaninePremolar Incisor Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 14 Fig. 2.4 Effect of saliva on starchIodine solution Water Boiled rice Boiled and chewed rice Sweets and tooth decay Normally bacteria are present in our mouth but they are not harmful to us. However, if we do not clean our teeth and mouth after eating, many harmful bacteria also begin to live and grow in it. These bacteriabreak down the sugars present from the leftover food and release acids (see Chapter 4 to know what an acid is). The acids gradually damage the teeth (Fig. 2.5). This is called tooth decay . If it is not treated in time, it causes severe toothache and in extreme cases results in tooth loss. Chocolates, sweets, soft drinks and other sugar products are the major culprits of tooth decay. Therefore, one should clean the teeth with a brush or datun and dental floss (a special strong thread which is moved between twoteeth to take out trapped food particles) at least twice a day andrinse the mouth after every meal. Also, one should not put dirty fingers or