Electric cell 2. Electric bulb 3. Switch in ‘ON’ position 4. Switch in ‘OFF’ position5. Battery6. Wire that the positive terminal of one cell is connected to the negative terminal of the next cell. Such a combination of two ormore cells is called a battery. Reprint 2024-25 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS 111 that the rubber bands hold the metal strips tightly. You could also buy cell holders from the market for making batteries of twoor more electric cells. Place the cells in them properly, such that the positiveterminal of one cell is connected to the negative terminal of the next cell.Connect a piece of wire each to the two metal clips on the cell holder as shown in Fig.10.5. Your battery is ready foruse. The symbol used for representing a battery is shown in Table.10.1. Let us now draw a circuit diagram of an electric circuit using symbols shownin Table 10.1. Activity 10.1 Make the electric circuit shown inFig. 10.7. You used a similar circuit in Class VI to make an electric bulb glow. Do you remember that the bulbglows only when the switch is in the ‘ON’ position? The bulb glows as soon as the switch is moved to the ‘ON’position. Copy this electric circuit in your notebook. Make also a circuit diagramof this circuit using symbols for the various electric components. Is your diagram similar to the one shown in Fig. 10.8? It is much easier to draw a circuit diagram using symbols. Therefore, we generally represent an electric circuit by its circuit diagram. Fig. 10.9 shows another circuit diagram. Is it identical to the circuitdiagram shown in Fig.10.8? In which way is it different? Would the bulb glow in this electric circuit? Recall that the bulb glows onlywhen the switch is in the ‘ON’ positionand the electric circuit is closed.Fig. 10.4 A cell holder Fig. 10.5 Another type of cell holder Paheli and Boojho wonder whether the batteries used in tractors, trucks and inverters are also made from cells.Then why is it called a battery? Can you help them to find the answer to this question? Fig. 10.6 Truck battery and its cutout Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 112electric current passes through it. When the bulb gets fused, its filament is broken. Fig. 10.8 Circuit diagram of electric circuit shown in Fig. 10.7Fig. 10.9 Another circuit diagram If the filament of the bulb is broken, would the circuit be complete? Wouldthe bulb still glow? You might have noticed that a glowing electric bulb become warm. Doyou know why? 10.2 H EATING EFFECT OF ELECTRIC CURRENT Activity 10.2 Take an electric cell, a bulb, a switchand connecting wires. Make an electriccircuit as shown in Fig.10.9. This activity has to be done using only one cell. Keep the switch in the ‘OFF’Fig. 10.7 An electric circuit In the bulb there is a thin wire, called the filament, which glows when anCAUTION Never touch a lighted electric bulbconnected to the mains. It may be veryhot and your hand may get burnt