piece of a chlorine tablet. Mixwell until the water is clear. Label the test tube “Chlorinated; Sample 4” . Observe carefully the samples in all the test tubes. Do not taste ! Just smell them!Now answer the following questions: (a) What changes did you observe in the appearance of the liquid afteraeration? (b) Did aeration change the odour? (c ) What was removed by the sand filter? (d) Did chlorine remove the colour? (e) Did chlorine have an odour? Was it worse than that of the wastewater? 13.4 W ASTE WATER TREATMENT PLANT (WWTP) Treatment of wastewater involves physical, chemical, and biological processes, which remove physical,chemical and biological matter that contaminates the wastewater.1. Wastewater is passed through bar screens. Large objects like rags, sticks, cans, plastic packets, napkins are removed (Fig. 13.3). Fig. 13.2 Filtration process Fig. 13.3 Bar screen Fig. 13.4 Grit and sand removal tank2. Water then goes to a grit and sand removal tank. The speed of theincoming wastewater is decreased to allow sand, grit and pebbles to settledown (Fig. 13.4). 3. The water is then allowed to settle in a large tank which is sloped towardsthe middle. Solids like faeces settleat the bottom and are removed with Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 160After several hours, the suspended microbes settle at the bottom of the tank as activated sludge. The water is then removed from the top. The activated sludge is about 97% water. The water is removed by sanddrying beds or machines. Dried sludge is used as manure, returning organicmatter and nutrients to the soil. The treated water has a very low level of organic material and suspendedmatter. It is discharged into a sea, a river or into the ground. Nature cleans it up further. Sometimes it may be necessaryto disinfect water with chemicals like chlorine and ozone before releasing it into the distribution system. Become an active citizen Waste generation is a natural part ofhuman activity. But we can limit the a scraper. This is the sludge . A skimmer removes the floatable solidslike oil and grease. Water so clearedis called clarified water (Fig. 13.5). The sludge is transferred to a separate tank where it is decomposed by the anaerobic bacteria. The biogas produced in the process can be used as fuel or can be used to produce electricity.4. Air is pumped into the clarified water to help aerobic bacteria to grow.Bacteria consume human waste, foodwaste, soaps and other unwanted matter still remaining in clarified water (Fig. 13.6). Fig. 13.6 AeratorDid you know ? It has been suggested that we should plant eucalyptus trees all along sewage ponds. These trees absorb allsurplus wastewater rapidly and release pure water vapour into the atmosphere. The water in a river is cleaned naturally by processes that are similar to those adopted in a wastewater treatment plant. Fig. 13.5 Water clarifier Reprint 2024-25 WASTEWATER STORY 161type of waste and quantity of waste produced. Often we have been repelledby offensive smell. The sight of open drains is disgusting. The situation worsens in