produced. A change in smell may take place or a new smell may be given off. A colour change may take place . A gas may be formed. Let us look at some examples.You saw that burning of magnesium ribbon is a chemical change. Burningof coal, wood or leaves is also a chemicalchange. In fact, burning of any substance is a chemical change. Burning is always accompanied byproduction of heat.Fig. 5.5 Set up to pass gas through lime water Vinegar + Baking sodaCarbondioxide Limewater Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 52Explosion of a firework is a chemical change. You know that such an explosion produces heat, light, sound and unpleasant gases that pollute the atmosphere. That is why you are advisednot to play with fireworks. When food gets spoiled, it produces a foul smell. Shall we call this change achemical change? You must have noticed that a slice of an apple acquires a brown colour if it isnot consumed immediately. If you have not seen this change in colour, cut a fresh slice of apple and keep it away forsome time. Repeat the same activity with a slice of potato or brinjal. The change of colour in these cases is due to theformation of new substances. Are not these changes chemical changes? In Chapter 4, you neutralised an acid with a base. Is neutralisation a chemicalchange?5.3 R USTING OF IRON Let us get back to rusting. This is onechange that affects iron articles and slowly destroys them. Since iron is usedin making bridges, ships, cars, truck bodies and many other articles, the monetary loss due to rusting is huge. The process of rusting can be represented by the following equation: Iron (Fe) + Oxygen (O 2, from the air) + water (H2O)  rust (iron oxide Fe2O3) For rusting, the presence of both oxygen and water (or water vapour)is essential. In fact, if the content of moisture in air is high, which means if it is morehumid, rusting becomes faster. So, how do we prevent rusting? Prevent iron articles from coming incontact with oxygen, or water, or both. One simple way is to apply a coat of paint or grease. In fact, these coatsshould be applied regularly to prevent rusting. Another way is to deposit a layer of a metal like chromium or zinc on iron.A protective shield You must have heard of the ozone layerin our atmosphere. It protects us fromthe harmful ultraviolet radiation which come from the sun. Ozone absorbs this radiation and breaks down to oxygen.Oxygen is different from ozone. Can we call the breaking down of ozone a chemical change? If ultraviolet radiation were not absorbed by ozone, it would reach theearth’s surface and cause harm to usand other life forms. Ozone acts as a natural shield against this radiation. We learnt in Chapter 1 that plants produce their food by a process called photosynthesis. Can we call photosynthesis a chemical change? Paheli said that even digestion is a chemical change. Reprint 2024-25 PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 53 Copper