acidic/basic/neutral? How would you verify it?5. Describe the process of neutralisation with the help of an example. 6. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false: (i) Nitric acid turn red litmus blue. (T/F) (ii) Sodium hydroxide turns blue litmus red. (T/F) (iii) Sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid neutralise each other and form salt and water. (T/F) (iv) Indicator is a substance which shows different colours in acidic and basic solutions. (T/F) (v) Tooth decay is caused by the presence of a base. (T/F) 7. Dorji has a few bottles of soft drink in his restaurant. But, unfortu- nately, these are not labelled. He has to serve the drinks on the demand of customers. One customer wants acidic drink, another wants basicand third one wants neutral drink. How will Dorji decide which drink isto be served to whom? 8. Explain why: (a) An antacid tablet is taken when you suffer from acidity.Keywords Acid Acidic BaseBasicIndicatorNeutralNeutralisationSalt Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 46(b) Calamine solution is applied on the skin when an ant bites. (c) Factory waste is neutralised before disposing it into the water bodies. 9. Three liquids are given to you. One is hydrochloric acid, another is sodium hydroxide and third is a sugar solution. How will you identify them? You have only turmeric indicator. 10. Blue litmus paper is dipped in a solution. It remains blue. What is the nature of the solution? Explain. 11. Consider the following statements: (a) Both acids and bases change colour of all indicators. (b) If an indicator gives a colour change with an acid, it does not give a change with a base. (c) If an indicator changes colour with a base, it does not change colour with an acid. (d) Change of colour in an acid and a base depends on the type of the indicator. Which of these statements are correct?(i) All four (ii) a and d (iii) b, c and d (iv) only d Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Using the knowledge of acids and bases, write a secret message with the help of baking soda and beet root. Explain how it works.(Hint: Prepare baking soda solution in water. Use this solution to write the message on a sheet of white paper with a cotton bud. Rub a slice of fresh beet root over the message.) 2. Prepare red cabbage juice by boiling a piece of red cabbage in water. Use it as an indicator and test the acidic and basic solutions with it.Present your observations in the form of a table. 3. Bring the soil sample of your area, find out if it is acidic, basic or neutral. Discuss with farmers if they treat the soil in any manner. 4. Visit a doctor. Find out the medicines, he prescribes to treat acidity. Ask him how acidity can be prevented. Did you know? Each cell in our body contains an acid, the deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA. It controls every feature of the body such as