The following activityconfirms this idea. Activity 3.9 Light a candle. Keep one hand above the flame and one hand on the side of the flame (Fig. 3.10). Do your hands feelequally hot? If not which hand feels hotter? And why?Fig. 3.10 Transfer of heat by convection in air Fig. 3.9 Convection of heat in water Be careful. Keep your hands at a safedistance from the flame so that they do not get burnt. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 32From the sun the heat comes to us by another process known as radiation . The transfer of heat by radiation doesnot require any medium. It can takeplace whether a medium is present or not. When we sit in front of a room heater, we get heat by this process. Ahot utensil kept away from the flame cools down as it transfers heat to the surroundings by radiation. Our bodytoo, gives heat to the surroundings and receives heat from it by radiation. All hot bodies radiate heat. When this heat falls on some object, a part ofit is reflected, a part is absorbed and a part may be transmitted. Thetemperature of the object increases due to the absorbed part of the heat. Whyare you advised to use an umbrella when you go out in the sun? 3.5 K INDS OF CLOTHES WE WEAR IN SUMMER AND WINTER You know that in summer we prefer light-coloured clothes and in winter we usually wear dark-coloured clothes. Whyis it so? Let us find out Activity 3.10 Take two identical tin cans. Paint theouter surface of one black and of the other white (Fig. 3.12). Pour equal amounts of water in each and leave them in the mid-day sun for about an hour. Measure the temperature of water in both the cans. Do you find anydifference in the temperatures? In Fig. 3.11 Sea breeze and Land breezeDay time Night time Hot CoolCoolHot Reprint 2024-25 HEAT 33 We often use electricity and fuels like coal and wood to keep our houses cool or warm. Is it possible to construct buildings, that are not affected much by heatand cold outside? This can be done by constructing outer walls of buildings so that they have trapped layers of air. One way of doing this is to use hollow bricks, which are available these days. which can is the water warmer? Youcan feel the difference even by touchingwater in the two cans. Activity 3.11 Fill the two cans used in Activity 3.10 with the same amount of hot water at the same temperature (say, at 60oC). Leave the cans in a room or in a shade. Note the temperature of water after 10–15 minutes. Does the temperature of water in both the cans fall by the same amount? Do these activities suggest to you the reason why it is more comfortable towear white or light-coloured clothes inthe summer and dark-coloured clothes in the winter? Dark surfaces absorb more heat and, therefore, we feel comfortable with dark coloured clothes in the winter. Light