size. If you increase the distance of the spoon from your face, you maysee your image inverted (Fig. 11.11). You can also compare the image of your pen or pencil instead of your face. The curved shining surface of a spoon acts as a mirror. The most commonexample of a curved mirror is a sphericalmirror. If the reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is concave, it is called a concavemirror. If the reflecting surface is convex, then it is a convex mirror (Fig. 11.12). (a) (b) Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT 129CAUTION You will conduct Activity 11.6 in the sunlight. Be careful, never lookdirectly towards the Sun or its image as it may damage your eyes. You may look at the image of the Sun when itis thrown on a screen or a wall.The inner surface of a spoon acts like a concave mirror, while its outer surfaceacts like a convex mirror. We know that the image of an object formed by a plane mirror cannot beobtained on a screen. Let us investigateif it is also true for the image formed by a concave mirror. Activity 11.6Fig. 11.14 A concave mirror forms a real image of the sun Take a concave mirror. Hold it facing the Sun. Try to get the light reflected bythe mirror on a sheet of paper. Adjust the distance of the paper until you get a sharp bright spot on it (Fig. 11.14). Holdthe mirror and the sheet of paper steady for a few minutes. Does the paper start burning? This bright spot is, in fact, the image of the Sun. Notice that this image isformed on a screen. An image formedon a screen is called a real image . Recollect that in Activity 11.2 the imageformed by a plane mirror could not beobtained on a screen. Such an image is called a virtual image . Now let us try to obtain on the screen the image of a candle flame formed by aconcave mirror. Activity 11.7 Fix a concave mirror on a stand (any arrangement to keep the mirror steady would do) and place it on a table (Fig. 11.15). Paste a piece of white paperon a cardboard sheet (say aboutWhy are concave and convex mirrors called spherical mirrors? Take a rubber ball and cut a portion of it with a knife or a hack-saw blade [Fig. 11.13 (a)]. (Be careful. Ask an elder person to help you in cutting the ball). The inner surface of the cut ball is called concave and the outer surface is called convex(Fig. 11.13 (b)). Fig. 11.13 A spherical mirror is a part of a sphere(a) (b)Convex surface Concave surface Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 13015 cm × 10 cm). This will act as a screen. Keep a lighted candle on the table at a distance of about 50 cm from the mirror. Try to obtain the image of the flame onthe screen. For this, move the screen till a sharp image of the flame is obtained. Make sure that, the screen does