effect of the indicator on acidic, basic and neutral solutions?China rose indicator (Fig. 4.3) turns acidic solutions to dark pink (magenta) and basic solutions to green.Coffee is brown And bitter in taste. Is it an acid?Or a base? Don’t give the answer Without any test,You are in the dark With its taste.Paheli brought the following paheli (riddle) for you. I am not getting the same result when using solid baking soda on dry litmus paper. Why? Make a solution of baking soda and then try. Activity 4.4 The teacher is requested to get the dilutesolution of the following chemicals from his/her school laboratory or from anearby school: hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, nitric acid, acetic acid, sodium hydroxide, ammonium hydro-xide, calcium hydroxide (lime water). Table 4.5 S. Name of acid Effect on Effect on Effect on No. litmus paper turmeric paper China rose solution 1. Dilute hydrochloric acid 2. 3. Reprint 2024-25 ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 43 Stir the tube gently. Is there any change in the colour of the solution? Continue adding the sodium hydroxide solutiondrop by drop while stirring till the pink colour just appears. Now add one more drop of dilute hydrochloric acid. What do you observe?The solution again becomes colourless. Again add one drop of sodiumhydroxide solution. Is there any change in colour? The solution again becomes pink in colour. It is evident that when the solution is basic, phenolphthalein gives a pinkcolour. On the other hand, when thesolution is acidic, it remains colourless. Fig. 4.4 Process of neutralisationDemonstrate the effect of the threeindicators on each of these solutions.Record your observations in Table 4.5. 4.3 N EUTRALISATION We have learnt that acids turn bluelitmus red and bases turn red litmus blue. Let us see what happens when an acid is mixed with a base. We are going to use an indicator you have not used so far. It is calledphenolphthalein . Activity 4.5 To be demonstrated by the teacher in the class Fill one fourth of a test tube with dilute hydrochloric acid. Note down its colour.Note down the colour of phenolphthalein solution also. Add 2–3 drops of theindicator to the acid. Now shake the test tube gently. Do you observe any change in colour of the acid? Add to the acidic solution a drop of sodium hydroxide solution by a dropper.Are you familiar with the term acid rain? Have you ever heard about damagingeffect of acid rain? As the name indicates the rain containing excess of acids is called an acid rain. Where do these acids come from? The rain becomes acidic because carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide (which are releasedinto the air as pollutants) dissolve in rain drops to form carbonic acid, sulphuric acid and nitric acid respectively. Acid rain can cause damage to buildings, historical monuments, plants and animals. CAUTION Great care should be taken whilehandling laboratory acids and basesbecause these are corrosive in nature, irritating and harmful to skin. Base Acid + Indicator Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 44When an acidic solution is