EXUAL REPRODUCTION You have learnt earlier the structure ofa flower. You know that the flowers are the reproductive parts of a plant.Stamens are the male reproductive part and pistil is the female reproductive part (Fig. 8.9).water and nutrients are available algaegrow and multiply rapidly byfragmentation. An alga breaks up into two or more fragments. These fragments or pieces grow into new individuals(Fig. 8.6). This process continues and they cover a large area in a short period of time. Fig. 8.7 Reproduction through spore formation in fungusSpore formation In Chapter 1 you learnt that the fungi on a bread piece grow from spores which are present in the air. Repeat Activity1.2. Observe the spores in the cotton- like mesh on the bread. When spores are released they keep floating in theFig. 8.8 Reproduction through spore formation in fern HyphaSporangium SporesSori (Spore formingbodies) Fig. 8.6 Fragmentation in spirogyra (an alga) Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 86 Boojho wants to know how the male gamete in the pollen grain reaches the female gamete present in the ovule. Pollination Generally, pollen grains have a tough protective coat which prevents them from drying up. Since pollen grains are light, they can be carried by wind orActivity 8.4 Take a mustard/China rose/petuniaflower and separate its reproductive parts. Study the various parts of a stamen and pistil. Flowers which contain either only pistil or only stamens are calledunisexual flowers . Flowers which contain both stamens and pistil are called bisexual flowers . Corn, papaya and cucumber produce unisexual flowers, whereas mustard, rose and petunia have bisexual flowers. Both Fig. 8.10 Pollination in flower Fig. 8.9 Reproductive parts (b) PistilStigma Style Ovary Anther Filament (a) Stamen Ovule (a) Self-pollination (b) Cross-pollinationAntherStigmaStigma male and female unisexual flowers may be present in the same plant or indifferent plants. Could you identify the anther and the filament of a stamen? [Fig. 8.9 (a)].Anther contains pollen grains which produce male gametes . A pistil consists of stigma, style and ovary. Ovary contains one or more ovules. The female gamete or the egg is formed in an ovule [Fig. 8.9 (b)]. In sexual reproduction a male and a female gamete fuse to form a zygote . Pollens Reprint 2024-25 REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS 87water. Insects visit flowers and carry away pollen on their bodies. Some of the pollen lands on the stigma of a flowerof the same kind. The transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma of a flower is called pollination . If the pollen lands on the stigma of the same flower or another flower of the same plant, it is called self-pollination. When the pollenof a flower lands on the stigma of a flower of a different plant of the same kind, it is called cross-pollination [Fig. 8.10 (a) and (b)]. Fertilisation The cell which results after fusion of the gametes is called a zygote . The process of fusion of male and female Boojho wants to know why flowers are generally so colourful and fragrant. Is it to attract insects?