reading. This is the temperature of water at that time. Compare the temperature of water recorded by each student in the class. Boojho wonders why the level of mercury should change at all when the bulb of the thermometer is brought in contact with another object? Reprint 2024-25 HEAT 29 body temperature? Obviously, it is not convenient to use the laboratorythermometer for this purpose. Why does the mercury not fall or rise in a clinical thermometer when takenout of the mouth? Observe a clinical thermometer again. Do you see a kink near the bulb(Fig. 3.6). What is the use of the kink? It prevents mercury level from falling onits own.in all cases heat flows from a hotterobject to a colder object. How does heat flow? Let us investigate. Activity 3.6 Take a rod or flat strip of a metal, say ofaluminium or iron. Fix a few small waxpieces on the rod. These pieces should be at nearly equal distances (Fig. 3.7). Clamp the rod to a stand. If you do notfind a stand, you can put one end of the rod in between bricks. Now, heat the other end of the rod and observe. What happens to the wax pieces? Do these pieces begin to fall? Which piecefalls the first? Do you think that heat isFig. 3.6 A clinical thermometer has a kink in it 3.4 T RANSFER OF HEAT You might have observed that a frying pan becomes hot when kept on a flame. It is because the heat passes from theflame to the utensil. When the pan is removed from the fire, it slowly cools down. Why does it cool down? The heatis transferred from the pan to the surroundings. So you can understand that in both cases, the heat flows froma hotter object to a colder object. In fact, Paheli asks: “Does it mean that heat will not be transferred if the temperature of two objects is the same?” transferred from the end nearest to theflame to the other end? The process by which heat is transferred from the hotter end to thecolder end of an object is known asconduction . In solids, generally, theFig. 3.7 Flow of heat through a metal stripThere is a lot of concern over the use of mercury in thermometers. Mercury is atoxic substance and is very difficult to dispose of if a thermometer breaks. Thesedays, digital thermometers are available which do not use mercury. Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 30heat is transferred by the process of conduction. Do all substances conduct heat easily? You must have observed thatthe metallic pan for cooking has a plasticor wooden handle. Can you lift a hot pan by holding it from the handle without getting hurt? Activity 3.7 Heat water in a small pan or a beaker.Collect some articles such as a steel spoon, plastic scale, pencil and divider. Dip one end of each of these articles inhot water (Fig. 3.8). Wait for a fewminutes. Touch the other end. Enteryour observation in Table 3.3. The materials which