faster. We call the distancecovered by an object in a unit time as the speed of the object. When we say that a car is moving with a speed of 50kilometres per hour, it implies that it will cover a distance of Fig. 9.2 Position of vehicles shown in Fig. 9.1 after some timeFig. 9.1 Vehicles moving in the same direction on a road 50 kilometres in one hour. However, a car seldom moves with a constant speed for one hour. In fact, it starts movingslowly and then picks up speed. So, when we say that the car has a speed of 50 kilometres per hour, we usuallyconsider only the total distance covered by it in one hour. We do not bother whether the car has been moving with Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 94We can determine the speed of a given object once we can measure the time taken by it to cover a certain distance. In Class VI you learnt how to measuredistances. But, how do we measure time? Let us find out. 9.3 M EASUREMENT OF TIME If you did not have a clock, how wouldyou decide what time of the day it is? Have you ever wondered how our elderscould tell the approximate time of the day by just looking at shadows? How do we measure time interval of a month? A year? Our ancestors noticed that many events in nature repeat themselves after definite intervals of time. For example,they found that the sun rises everydayin the morning. The time between onesunrise and the next was called a day. Similarly, a month was measured from one new moon to the next. A year wasfixed as the time taken by the earth to complete one revolution of the sun. Often we need to measure intervals of time which are much shorter than aday. Clocks or watches are perhaps the most common time measuring devices.Have you ever wondered how clocks and watches measure time? The working of clocks is rather complex. But all of them make use ofsome periodic motion. One of the most well-known periodic motions is that ofa simple pendulum. In everyday life we seldom find objects moving with a constant speed over long distances or for long durations of time.If the speed of an object moving along a straight line keeps changing, its motion is said to be non-uniform. On the other hand, an object moving along a straight line with a constant speed is said to be in uniform motion . In this case, the average speed is the same as the actual speed. Fig. 9.3 Some common clocks(b) Table clock (c) Digital clock(a) Wall clock a constant speed or not during that hour. The speed calculated here isactually the average speed of the car. In this book we shall use the term speed for average speed. So, for us the speed is the total distance covered divided by the total time taken . Thus, Total distance coveredSpeed = Total time taken Reprint 2024-25 MOTION AND