break the circuit. A fuse is thus a safety device which Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 116Fig. 10.17 Effect of current on a compass needle Fig. 10.18 Hans Christian Oersted (A.D. 1777-1851)prevents damages to electrical circuits and possible fires. Fuses of different kinds are used for different purposes. Fig. 10.14 showsfuses used in our houses. Fuses shown in Fig. 10.15 are generally usedin electrical appliances. We observed the heating effect of the electric current and learnt how we useit to our advantage. Does the electric current have other effects also? 10.3 M AGNETIC EFFECT OF ELECTRIC CURRENT Activity 10.5 Take the cardboard tray from inside adiscarded matchbox. Wrap an electricwire a few times around the cardboard tray. Place a small compass needleinside it. Now connect the free ends of this wire to an electric cell through a switch as shown in Fig.10.17. Note the direction in which the compass needle is pointing. Bring a barmagnet near the compass needle.Observe what happens. Now, while watching the compass needle carefully, move the switch to the ‘ON’ position.These days Miniaturecircuit breakers (MCBs)are increasingly being used in place of fuses. These are switches whichautomatically turn off when current in a circuit exceeds the safe limit. Youturn them on and the circuit is once again complete. Look for ISImark on MCBs also. Fig. 10.16 Miniature circuit breaker (MCB) CAUTION Always, use proper fuses which have been specified for particular applications, carrying ISI mark. Neveruse just any wire or strip of metal in place of a fuse. Reprint 2024-25 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS 11710.4 E LECTROMAGNET Activity 10.6 Take around 75 cm long piece of insulated (plastic or cloth covered or enamelled) flexible wire and an iron nail,say about 6–10 cm long. Wind the wire tightly around the nail in the form of a coil. Connect the free ends of the wireto the terminals of a cell through a switch as shown in Fig. 10.19. Place some pins on or near the end of the nail. Now switch on the current.What happens? Do the pins cling to the tip of the nail? Switch off the current.Are the pins still clinging to the end of the nail? The coil in the above activity behaves like a magnet when electric current flowsthrough it. When the electric current is switched off, the coil generally loses itsmagnetism. Such coils are called electromagnets . The electromagnets can be made very strong and can lift very heavy loads. Do you remember the crane about which you read in Chapter 10 of Class VI? The end of such a cranehas a strong electromagnet attached to it. The electromagnets are also used to separate magnetic material from thejunk. Doctors use tiny electromagnets to take out small pieces of magnetic material that have accidentally fallen in Fig. 10.19 An electromagnetWhat do you observe? Does the compassneedle deflect? Move the switch back tothe ‘OFF’ position. Does the compass needle come back to its initial position? Repeat the experiment a few times. What does this experiment indicate? We