allow heat to pass through them easily areconductors of heat. For examples, aluminum, iron and copper. The materials which do not allow heat to pass through them easily are poorconductors of heat such as plastic and wood. Poor conductors are known as insulators . The water and air are poor conductors of heat. Then, how does theheat transfer take place in thesesubstances? Let us find out. Activity 3.8 Take a round bottom flask (if flask is not available, a beaker can be used). Fillit two-thirds with water. Place it on atripod, or make some arrangement to place the flask in such a way that you can heat it by placing a candle below it.Wait till the water in the flask is still. Place a crystal of potassium permanganate at the bottom of the flaskgently using a straw. Now, heat the water by placing the candle just below the crystal. Write your observation in your notebook and also draw a picture of what you observe (Fig. 3.9). When water is heated, the water near the flame getshot. Hot water rises up.The cold water from the sides moves down towards the source of heat. Thiswater also gets hot and risesFig. 3.8 Conduction of heat by different materials Table 3.3 Article Material with Does the other which the article end get hot is made of Yes/No Steel spoon Metal Yes Reprint 2024-25 HEAT 31 Notice that towards the top, the air gets heated by convection. Therefore, the hand above the flame feels hot. On thesides, however, there is no convection and air does not feel as hot as at the top. The people living in the coastal areas experience an interesting phenomenon.During the day, the land gets heatedfaster than the water. The air over the land becomes hotter and rises up. The cooler air from the sea rushes in towardsthe land to take its place. The warm air from the land moves towards the sea to complete the cycle (Fig. 3.11). The airfrom the sea is called the sea breeze . To receive the cooler sea breeze, the windowsof the houses in coastal areas are madeto face the sea. At night it is exactly the reverse. The water cools down more slowly than the land. So, the cool airfrom the land moves towards the sea. This is called the land breeze . When we come out in the sun, we feel warm. How does the heat from thesun reach us? It cannot reach us by conduction or convection as there is nomedium such as air in most part of the space between the earth and the sun.and water from the sides moves down. This process continues till the whole water gets heated. This mode of heat transfer is known as convection. How does the heat travel in air? In which direction does the smoke go? The air near the heat source gets hot and rises. The air from the sides comes in to take its place. In this way the air gets heated.