mixed with a basic solution, both the solutions neutralise the effect of each other. When an acid solution and a base solution are mixed in suitable amounts, both theacidic nature of the acid and the basic nature of the base are destroyed. The resulting solution is neither acidic norbasic. Touch the test tube immediately after neutralisation. What do you observe? In neutralisation reaction, heatis always produced, or evolved. The evolved heat raises the temperature of the reaction mixture. In neutralisation reaction a new substance is formed. This is called salt.Salt may be acidic, basic or neutral innature. Thus, neutralisation can be defined as follows: The reaction between an acid and a base is known as neutralisation. Saltand water are produced in this process with the evolution of heat. Acid+Base  Salt+Water (Heat is evolved) The following reaction is an example:Hydrochloric acid (HCl) + Sodium hydroxide (NaOH)  Sodium chloride (NaCl) + Water (H 2O) Boojho added dilute sulphuric acid to lime water. Will the reaction mixturebecome hot or cool? 4.4 N EUTRALISATION IN EVERYDAY LIFE Indigestion Our stomach contains hydrochloricacid. It helps us to digest food, as youhave learnt in Chapter 2. But toomuch of acid in the stomach causesindigestion. Sometimes indigestion is painful. To relieve indigestion, we take an antacid such as milk ofmagnesia, which contains magnesium hydroxide. It neutralises the effect of excessive acid. Ant bite When an ant bites, it injectsthe acidic liquid (formic acid) into theskin. The effect of the acid can be neutralised by rubbing moist baking soda (sodium hydrogencarbonate) orcalamine solution, which contains zinc carbonate. Soil treatment Excessive use of chemical fertilisers makes the soil acidic. Plants do notgrow well when the soil is either too acidic or too basic . When the soil is too acidic, it is treated with bases like quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide). If the soil is basic, organic matter (compost) is added to it. Organic matter releases acids which neutralises the basic nature of the soil. Factory wastes The wastes of many factoriescontain acids. If they are allowed to flow into the water bodies, the acids will kill fish and other organisms.The factory wastes are, therefore, neutralised by adding basic substances. Reprint 2024-25 ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 45 What you have learnt Acids are sour in taste. Generally, bases are bitter in taste and soapy to touch. Acid turns blue litmus red. Bases turn red litmus blue. Substances which are neither acidic nor basic are called neutral. Solutions of substances that show different colour in acidic, basic andneutral solutions are called indicators. An acid and a base neutralise each other and form a salt. A salt may beacidic, basic or neutral in nature. Exercises 1. State differences between acids and bases. 2. Ammonia is found in many household products, such as window cleaners. It turns red litmus blue. What is its nature? 3. Name the source from which litmus solution is obtained. What is the use of this solution? 4. Is the distilled water