object. 4. State the characteristics of the image formed by a plane mirror.5. Find out the letters of English alphabet or any other language known to you in which the image formed in a plane mirror appears exactly like the letter itself. Discuss your findings. Reprint 2024-25 LIGHT 1396. What is a virtual image? Give one situation where a virtual image is formed. 7. State two differences between a convex and a concave lens. 8. Give one use each of a concave and a convex mirror.9. Which type of mirror can form a real image? 10. Which type of lens forms always a virtual image?Choose the correct option in questions 11–1311. A virtual image larger than the object can be produced by a (i) concave lens (ii) concave mirror (iii) convex mirror (iv) plane mirror 12. David is observing his image in a plane mirror. The distance between the mirror and his image is 4 m. If he moves 1 m towards the mirror, then the distance between David and his image will be (i) 3 m (ii) 5 m (iii) 6 m (iv) 8 m 13. The rear view mirror of a car is a plane mirror. A driver is reversing his car at a speed of 2 m/s. The driver sees in his rear view mirror theimage of a truck parked behind his car. The speed at which the image of the truck appears to approach the driver will be (i) 1 m/s (ii) 2 m/s (iii) 4 m/s (iv) 8 m/s Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Play with a mirror Write your name with a sketch pen on a thin sheetof paper, polythene or glass.Read your name on the sheetwhile standing in front of aplane mirror. Now look atyour image in the mirror. 2. A burning candle in water Take a shoe box, open on oneside. Place a small lightedcandle in it. Place a clearglass sheet (roughly 25 cm × 25 cm) infront of this candle (Fig. 11.33). Try to locate theimage of the candle behindFig. 11.33 Candle burning in water Reprint 2024-25 SCIENCE 140the glass sheet. Place a glass of water at its position. Ask your friends to look at the image of the candle through the sheet of glass. Ensure thatcandle is not visible to your friends. Your friends will be surprised to seethe candle burning in water. Try to explain the reason. 3. Make a rainbow Try to make your own rainbow. You can try this project in the morningor in the evening. Stand with your back towards the Sun. Take a hosepipeor a water pipe used in the garden. Make a fine spray in front of you.You can see different colours of rainbow in the spray. 4. Visit a laughing gallery in some science centre or a science park or a village mela. You will find some large mirrors there. You can see your distorted and funny images in these mirrors. Try to find out the kind ofmirrors used there. 5.