through their skins as well as their lungs. (T/F) (iv) The fishes have lungs for respiration. (T/F) (v) The size of the chest cavity increases during inhalation. (T/F) 8. Given below is a square of letters in which are hidden different words related to respiration in organisms. These words may be present in any direction — upwards, downwards, or along the diagonals. Find the wordsfor your respiratory system. Clues about those words are given belowthe square. SV MP LU N G S CZ GQW XNTLR M A T I DOT CI Y RXYM S R ABR HI ANTAYS T PTB Z R C EMI A MT SI HASP I RAC LESNE DKJNSAT (i) The air tubes of insects (ii) Skeletal structures surrounding chest cavity (iii) Muscular floor of chest cavity (iv) Tiny pores on the surface of leaf (v) Small openings on the sides of the body of an insect (vi) The respiratory organs of human beings (vii) The openings through which we inhale(viii) An anaerobic organism (ix) An organism with tracheal system 9. The mountaineers carry oxygen with them because: (a) At an altitude of more than 5 km there is no air. Reprint 2024-25 RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 69Did you know? For us oxygen is essential, but for those organisms which do not use it, oxygen is toxic. In fact, for humans and other organisms it may bedangerous to breathe pure oxygen for long.(b) The amount of air available to a person is less than that available on the ground. (c) The temperature of air is higher than that on the ground. (d) The pressure of air is higher than that on the ground. Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Observe fish in an aquarium. You will find flap like structures on both sides of their heads. These are flaps which cover the gills. These flapsopen and close alternately. On the basis of these observations, explainthe process of respiration in the fish. 2. Visit a local doctor. Learn about the harmful effects of smoking. You can also collect material on this topic from other sources. You can seek helpof your teacher or parents. Find out the percentage of people of yourarea who smoke. If you have a smoker in your family, confront him withthe material that you have collected. 3. Visit a doctor. Find out about artificial respiration. Ask the doctor: (a) When does a person need artificial respiration? (b) Does the person need to be kept on artificial respiration temporarily or permanently? (c) From where can the person get supply of oxygen for artificial respiration? 4. Measure the breathing rate of the members of your family and some of your friends. Investigate: (c) If the breathing rate of children is different from that of adults. (d) If the breathing rate of males is different from that of females. If there is a difference in any of these cases, try to find the reason. Reprint 2024-25