Motion and Time9
In Class VI, you learnt about different
types of motions. You learnt that a
motion could be along a straight line,
it could be circular or periodic. Can you
recall these three types of motions?
Table 9.1 gives some common
examples of motions. Identify the typeof motion in each case.9.1 S LOW OR FAST
We know that some vehicles move fasterthan others. Even the same vehicle maymove faster or slower at different times.
Make a list of ten objects moving along
a straight path. Group the motion ofthese objects as slow and fast. How did
you decide which object is moving slow
and which one is moving fast?
If vehicles are moving on a road in
the same direction, we can easily tellwhich one of them is moving faster thanthe other. Let us look at the motion of
vehicles moving on a road.
Activity 9.1
Look at Fig. 9.1. It shows the position
of some vehicles moving on a road inthe same direction at some instant of
time. Now look at Fig. 9.2. It shows the
position of the same vehicles after sometime. From your observation of the two
figures, answer the following questions:
Which vehicle is moving the fastest
of all? Which one of them is moving theslowest of all?
The distance moved by objects in a
given interval of time can help us todecide which one is faster or slower. For
example, imagine that you have gone tosee off your friend at the bus stand.
Suppose you start pedalling your bicycle
at the same time as the bus begins toTable 9.1 Some examples of
different types of motion
Example of Type of motion
motion Along a straight
line/circular/
periodic
Soldiers in a
march past
Bullock cart
moving on a
straight road
Hands of an
athlete in a race
Pedal of a bicycle
in motion
Motion of the Earth
around the Sun
Motion of a swing
Motion  of a
pendulum
It is common experience that the
motion of some objects is slow while that
of some others is fast.
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 93move. The distance covered by you after
5 minutes would be much smaller thanthat covered by the bus. Would you say
that the bus is moving faster than the
bicycle?
We often say that the faster vehicle
has a higher speed.  In a 100-metre raceit is easy to decide whose speedis the highest. One who takesshortest time to cover the
distance of 100 metres has the
highest speed.
9.2 S PEED
You are probably familiar withthe word speed. In theexamples given above, a higher
speed seems to indicate that a
given distance has beencovered in a shorter time, or a
larger distance covered in a
given time.
The most convenient way to
find out which of the two ormore objects is moving fasteris to compare the distances
moved by them in a unit time.
Thus, if we know the distancecovered by two buses in one
hour, we can tell which one is
faster. We call the distancecovered by an object in a unit
time as the speed  of the object.
When we say that a car is
moving with a speed of 50kilometres per hour, it implies
that it will cover a distance of
Fig. 9.2  Position of vehicles shown in
Fig. 9.1 after some timeFig. 9.1  Vehicles moving in the same
direction on a road
50 kilometres in one hour. However, a
car seldom moves with a constant speed
for one hour. In fact, it starts movingslowly and then picks up speed. So,
when we say that the car has a speed of
50 kilometres per hour, we usuallyconsider only the total distance covered
by it in one hour. We do not bother
whether the car has been moving with
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 94We can determine the speed of a given
object once we can measure the time
taken by it to cover a certain distance.
In Class VI you learnt how to measuredistances. But, how do we measure
time? Let us find out.
9.3 M EASUREMENT  OF TIME
If you did not have a clock, how wouldyou decide what time of the day it is?
Have you ever wondered how our elderscould tell the approximate time of the
day by just looking at shadows?
How do we measure time interval of
a month? A year?
Our ancestors noticed that many
events in nature repeat themselves after
definite intervals of time. For example,they found that the sun rises everydayin the morning. The time between onesunrise and the next was called a day.
Similarly, a month was measured from
one new moon to the next. A year wasfixed as the time taken by the earth to
complete one revolution of the sun.
Often we need to measure intervals
of time which are much shorter than aday. Clocks or watches are perhaps the
most common time measuring devices.Have you ever wondered how clocks and
watches measure time?
The working of clocks is rather
complex. But all of them make use ofsome periodic motion. One of the most
well-known periodic motions is that ofa simple pendulum.
In everyday life we seldom find objects
moving with a constant speed over long
distances or for long durations of time.If the speed of an object moving along
a straight line keeps changing, its
motion is said to be non-uniform. On
the other hand, an object moving along
a straight line with a constant speed
is said to be in uniform motion . In
this case, the average speed is the
same as the actual speed.
Fig. 9.3  Some common clocks(b) Table clock
(c) Digital clock(a) Wall clock
a constant speed or not during that
hour. The speed calculated here isactually the average speed of the car. In
this book we shall use the term speed
for average speed. So, for us the speed
is the total distance covered divided
by the total time taken . Thus,
Total distance coveredSpeed = Total time taken
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 95A simple pendulum consists of a
small metallic ball or a piece of stone
suspended from a rigid stand by athread [Fig. 9.4 (a)]. The metallic ball is
called the bob of the pendulum.
Fig. 9.4 (a) shows the pendulum at
rest in its mean position. When the bobof the pendulum is released after taking
it slightly to one side, it begins to moveto and fro [Fig. 9.4 (b)]. The to and fro
motion of a simple pendulum is an
example of a periodic or an oscillatorymotion.
The pendulum is said to have
completed one oscillation  when its bob,
starting from its mean position O, movesTo set the pendulum in motion,
gently hold the bob and move it slightly
to one side. Make sure that the string
attached to the bob is taut while youdisplace it. Now release the bob from its
displaced position. Remember that the
bob is not to be pushed when it isreleased. Note the time on the clock
when the bob is at its mean position.
Instead of the mean position you maynote the time when the bob is at one of
its extreme positions. Measure the time
the pendulum takes to complete 20oscillations. Record your observationsFig. 9.4  (b) Different
positions of the bob of an
oscillating simple pendulumFig. 9.4  (a) A simple
pendulumto A, to B and back to O. Thependulum also completes oneoscillation when its bob moves
from one extreme position A to the
other extreme position B andcomes back to A. The time taken
by the pendulum to complete one
oscillation is called its time
period .
Activity 9.2
Set up a simple pendulum as
shown in Fig. 9.4 (a) with a
thread or string of length nearlyone metre. Switch off any fans
nearby. Let the bob of the
pendulum come to rest at itsmean position. Mark the mean
position of the bob on the floor
below it or on the wall behind it.
To measure the time period of
the pendulum we will needa stopwatch. However, if astopwatch is not available, a table
clock or a wristwatch can be used.A
OB
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 96Table 9.2 Time period of a simple
pendulum
Length of the string = 100 cm
S.No. Time taken for 20 Time period
oscillations (s) (s)
1. 42 2.1
2.
3.cells. These clocks are called quartz
clocks. The time measured by quartzclocks is much more accurate than that
by the clocks available earlier.
Units of time and speed
The basic unit of time is a second. Its
symbol is s. Larger units of time are
minutes (min) and hours (h). Youalready know how these units are related
to one another.
What would be the basic unit of
speed?
Since the speed is distance/time, the
basic unit of speed is m/s. Of course, it
could also be expressed in other units
such as m/min or km/h.
You must remember that the
symbols of all units are written insingular . For example, we write 50 km
and not 50 kms, or 8 cm and not 8 cms.
Boojho is wondering how many
seconds there are in a day and how
many hours in a year. Can you helphim?in Table 9.2. The first observation shownis just a sample. Your observations couldbe different from this. Repeat this
activity a few times and record your
observations. By dividing the time takenfor 20 oscillations by 20, get the time
taken for one oscillation, or the time
period of the pendulum.
Is the time period of your pendulum
nearly the same in all cases?
Note that a slight change in the
initial displacement does not affect the
time period of your pendulum.
Nowadays most clocks or watches
have an electric circuit with one or more
There is an interesting story about the discovery that the time period of a givenpendulum is constant. You might have heard the name of famous scientist
Galileo Galilie (A.D. 1564 –1642). It is said that once Galileo was sitting in achurch. He noticed that a lamp suspended from the ceiling with a chain was
moving slowly from one side to the other. He was surprised to find that his
pulse beat the same number of times during the interval in which the lampcompleted one oscillation. Galileo experimented with various pendulums to
verify his observation. He found that a pendulum of a given length takes always
the same time to complete one oscillation. This observation led to thedevelopment of pendulum clocks. Winding clocks and wristwatches were
refinements of the pendulum clocks.
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 97Different units of time are used
depending on the need.  For example, it
is convenient to express your age in
years rather than in days or hours.
Similarly, it will not be wise to expressin years the time taken by you to cover
the distance between your home and
your school.
How small or large is a time interval
of one second? The time taken in sayingaloud “two thousand and one” is nearbyone second. Verify it by counting aloud
from “two thousand and one” to “two
thousand and ten”. The pulse of anormal healthy adult at rest beats about
72 times in a minute that is about 12
times in 10 seconds.  This rate may beslightly higher for children.
Paheli wondered how time was
measured when pendulum
clocks were not available.
Many time measuring devices were
used in different parts of the world beforethe pendulum clocks became popular.
Sundials, water clocks and sand clocks
are some examples of such devices.Different designs of these devices were
developed in different parts of the world
(Fig. 9.5).
9.4 M EASURING  SPEED
Having learnt how to measure time anddistance, you can calculate the speed ofan object. Let us find the speed of a ball
moving along the ground.
Activity 9.3
Draw a straight line on the ground with
chalk powder or lime and ask one of
your friends to stand 1 to 2 m away from
it. Let your friend gently roll a ball alongthe ground in a direction perpendicular
to the line. Note the time at the moment
the ball crosses the line and also whenit comes to rest (Fig. 9.6). How much
time does the ball take to come to rest?
The smallest time interval that can be measured with commonly availableclocks and watches is one second. However, now special clocks are available
that can measure time intervals smaller than a second.  Some of these clockscan measure time intervals as small as one millionth or even one billionth of a
second. You might have heard the terms like microsecond and nanosecond.
One microsecond is one millionth of a second. A nanosecond is one billionthof a second. Clocks that measure such small time intervals are used for scientific
research. The time measuring devices used in sports can measure time intervals
that are one tenth or one hundredth of a second. On the other hand, times ofhistorical events are stated in terms of centuries or millenniums. The ages of
stars and planet are often expressed in billions of years. Can you imagine the
range of time intervals that we have to deal with?
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 98Measure the distance between the point
at which the ball crosses the line and
the point where it comes to rest. Youcan use a scale or a measuring
tape. Let different groups repeat the
activity. Record the measurements inTable 9.3. In each case calculate the
speed of the ball.
You may now like to compare your
speed of walking or cycling with that ofyour friends. You need to know the
distance of the school from your homeor from some other point. Each one of
you can then measure the time taken
to cover that distance and calculate yourspeed. It may be interesting to know who
amongst you is the fastest. Speeds of
some living organisms are given in
Fig. 9.6  Measuring the speed of a ball(a) Sundial at Jantar Mantar, Delhi(b) Sand clock
(c) Water clock
Fig. 9.5  Some ancient time-measuring devices
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 99Table 9.3 Distance moved and time taken by a moving ball
Name of the group Distance moved by Time taken (s) Speed = Distance/
the ball (m) Time taken (m/s)
Boojho wants to know
whether there is any device
that measures the speed.
Table 9.4, in km/h. You can calculate
the speeds in m/s yourself.
Rockets, launching satellites into
earth’s orbit, often attain speeds up to8 km/s. On the other hand, a tortoise
can move only with a speed of about 8
cm/s. Can you calculate how fast is therocket compared with the tortoise?
Once you know the speed of an
object, you can find the distance movedby it in a given time. All you have to do
is to multiply the speed by time. Thus,
Distance covered = Speed × Time
You can also find the time an object
would take to cover a distance while
moving with a given speed.You might have seen a meter fitted
on top of a scooter or a motorcycle.Similarly, meters can be seen on the
dashboards of cars, buses and other
vehicles. Fig. 9.7 shows the dashboardof a car. Note that one of the meters has
km/h written at one corner. This is
called a speedometer . It records theTime taken = Distance/Speed
Table 9.4 Fastest speed that some animals can attain
S. No. Name of the object Speed in km/h Speed in m/s
1. Falcon 320320 10 0 0
60 60
2. Cheetah 112
3. Blue fish 40 – 46 
4. Rabbit 56
5. Squirrel 196. Domestic mouse 11
7. Human 408. Giant tortoise 0.27
9. Snail 0.05
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 100speed directly in km/h. There is also
another meter that measures the
distance moved by the vehicle. This
meter is known as an odometer .
While going for a school picnic, Paheli
decided to note the reading on theodometer of the bus after every30 minutes till the end of the journey.
Later on she recorded her readings in
Table 9.5.
Can you tell how far was the picnic
spot from the school? Can you calculatethe speed of the bus? Looking at theTable, Boojho asked Paheli whether she
can tell how far they would have
travelled till 9:45 AM. Paheli had noanswer to this question. They went to
their teacher. She told them that one
way to solve this problem is to plot adistance-time graph. Let us find out how
such a graph is plotted.Table 9.5 Odometer reading at
different times of the journey
Time Odometer Distance from
(AM) reading the starting
point
8:00 AM 36540 km 0 km
8:30 AM 36560 km 20 km
9:00 AM 36580 km 40 km
9:30 AM 36600 km 60 km10:00 AM 36620 km 80 km9.5 D ISTANCE -TIME GRAPH
You might have seen that newspapers,
magazines, etc., present information in
various forms of graphs to make it
Fig. 9.8  A bar graph showing runs scored by a
team in each over
interesting. The type of graph shown in
Fig. 9.8 is known as a bar graph.
Another type of graphical representation
is a pie chart (Fig. 9.9). The graph shownin Fig. 9.10 is an example of a line graph.
The distance-time graph is a line graph.Let us learn to make such a graph.Fig. 9.7  The dashboard of a car
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 101
Table 9.6 The motion of a car
S. No. Time (min.) Distance (km)
1. 0 0
2. 1  13. 2 2
4. 3 3
5. 4 46. 5 5Fig. 9.10  A line graph showing change in
weight of a man with ageFig. 9.9  A pie chart showing composition
of air
Fig. 9.11  x-axis and y-axis on a graph paper
Take a sheet of graph paper. Draw
two lines perpendicular to each other
on it, as shown in Fig. 9.11. Mark the
horizontal line as XOX'. It is known asthe x-axis. Similarly mark the vertical
line YOY '. It is called the y-axis. The point
of intersection of XOX ' and YOY ' is
known as the origin O. The twoquantities between which the graph is
drawn are shown along these two axes.We show the positive values on the
x-axis along OX. Similarly, positive
values on the y-axis are shown alongOY. In this chapter we shall consider
only the positive values of quantities.Therefore, we shall use only the shadedpart of the graph shown in Fig. 9.11.
Boojho and Paheli found out the
distance travelled by a car and the timetaken by it to cover that distance. Their
data is shown in Table 9.6.
2468 10 12 14 16 18 20 2220
10304050607080Weight (in kg)
Age (in year)X O X
YY
You can make the graph by following
the steps given below:
Draw two perpendicular lines to
represent the two axes and markthem as OX and OY as in Fig. 9.11.
Decide the quantity to be shownalong the x-axis and that to beshown along the y-axis. In this caseY
XOther gases Oxygen
Nitrogen
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 102we show the time along the x-axis
and the distance along the y-axis.
Choose a scale to represent thedistance and another to representthe time on the graph. For the motionof the car scales could be
Time: 1 min = 1 cm
Distance: 1 km = 1 cm
Mark values for the time and thedistance on the respective axes
according to the scale you have
chosen. For the motion of the carmark the time 1 min, 2 min, … onthe x-axis from the origin O.
Similarly, mark the distance 1 km,
2 km … on the y-axis (Fig. 9.12).
Now you have to mark the points onthe graph paper to represent each
set of values for distance and time.
Observation recorded at S. No. 1in Table 9.6 shows that at time0 min the distance moved is also
zero. The point corresponding to this
set of values on the graph willtherefore be the origin itself. After 1minute, the car has moved a distance
of 1 km. To mark this set of values
look for the point that represents1 minute on the x-axis. Draw a lineparallel to the y-axis at this point.
Then draw a line parallel to the
x-axis from the point correspondingto distance 1 km on the y-axis. Thepoint where these two lines
intersect represents this set of values
on the graph (Fig. 9.12). Similarly,mark on the graph paper thepoints corresponding to different
sets of values.Fig. 9.12 shows the set of points onthe graph corresponding to positions
of the car at various times.
Join all the points on the graph as
shown in Fig. 9.13. It is a straight
line. This is the distance-time graph
for the motion of the car.
If the distance-time graph is a
straight line, it indicates that the
object is moving with a constantspeed. However, if the speed of the
object keeps changing, the graph can
be of any other shape.Fig. 9.12  Making a graph
Fig. 9.13  Making a graphOXY
XO
Y
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 103Generally, the choice of scales is not
as simple as in the example given in
Fig. 9.12 and 9.13. We may have to
choose two different scales to represent
the desired quantities on the x-axis and
the y-axis. Let us try to understand this
process with an example.
Let us again consider the motion of
the bus that took Paheli and her friends
to the picnic. The distance covered and
time taken by the bus are shown inTable 9.5. The total distance covered bythe bus is 80 km. If we decide to choose
a scale 1 km = 1 cm, we shall have to
draw an axis of length 80 cm. This isnot possible on a sheet of paper. On theother hand, a scale 10 km = 1 cm would
require an axis of length only 8 cm. This
scale is quite convenient. However, thegraph may cover only a small part ofthe graph paper.  Some of the points to
be kept in mind while choosing
the most suitable scale for drawing a
graph are:the difference between the highest
and the lowest values of eachquantity.
the intermediate values of eachquantity, so that with the scalechosen it is convenient to mark the
values on the graph, and
to utilise the maximum part of the
paper on which the graph is to be
drawn.
Suppose that you are given a graph
paper of size 25 cm  × 25 cm. One of the
scales which meets the above conditionsand can accommodate the data of Table9.5 could be
Distance: 5 km = 1 cm, andTime: 6 min = 1 cmCan you now draw the distance-time
graph for the motion of the bus? Is thegraph drawn by you similar to thatshown in Fig. 9.13?
Distance-time graphs provide a
variety of information about the motionFig. 9.14  Distance-time graph of the busY
X
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 104when compared to the data presented
by a table. For example, Table 9.5 givesinformation about the distance moved
by the bus only at some definite time
intervals. On the other hand, from thedistance-time graph we can find the
distance moved by the bus at any
instant of time. Suppose we want toknow how much distance the bus had
travelled at 8:15  AM. We mark the point
corresponding to the time (8:15 AM) on
the x-axis (Fig. 9.14). Suppose this point
is A.  Next we draw a line perpendicular
to the x-axis (or parallel to the y-axis) atpoint A. We then mark the point, T, onthe graph at which this perpendicularline intersects it (Fig. 9.14). Next, we
draw a line through the point T parallel
to the x-axis. This intersects the y-axisat the point B. The distance
corresponding to the point B on the y-
axis, OB, gives us the distance in kmcovered by the bus at 8:15  AM. How
much is this distance in km? Can younow help Paheli to find the distancemoved by the bus at 9:45  AM? Can you
also find the speed of the bus from itsdistance-time graph?
Bar graph
GraphsNon-uniform motionKeywords
OscillationSimple pendulumSpeedTime periodUniform motionUnit of time
What you have Learnt
The distance moved by an object in a unit time is called its speed.
Speed of objects help us to decide which one is moving faster than the
other.
The speed of an object is the distance travelled divided by the time takento cover that distance. Its basic unit is metre per second (m/s).
Periodic events are used for the measurement of time. Periodic motion ofa pendulum has been used to make clocks and watches.
Motion of objects can be presented in pictorial form by theirdistance-time graphs.
The distance-time graph for the motion of an object moving with a constantspeed is a straight line.
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 105Exercises
1. Classify the following as motion along a straight line, circular or
oscillatory motion:
(i) Motion of your hands while running.
(ii) Motion of a horse pulling a cart on a straight road.
(iii) Motion of a child in a merry-go-round.
(iv) Motion of a child on a see-saw.
(v) Motion of the hammer of an electric bell.
(vi) Motion of a train on a straight bridge.
2. Which of the following are not correct?
(i) The basic unit of time is second.
(ii) Every object moves with a constant speed.
(iii) Distances between two cities are measured in kilometres.
(iv) The time period of a given pendulum is constant.
(v) The speed of a train is expressed in m/h.
3. A simple pendulum takes 32 s to complete 20 oscillations. What is the
time period of the pendulum?
4. The distance between two stations is 240 km. A train takes 4 hours to
cover this distance. Calculate the speed of the train.
5. The odometer of a car reads 57321.0 km when the clock shows the time
08:30 AM. What is the distance moved by the car, if at 08:50 AM, the
odometer reading has changed to 57336.0 km? Calculate the speed ofthe car in km/min during this time. Express the speed in km/h also.
6. Salma takes 15 minutes from her house to reach her school on a
bicycle. If the bicycle has a speed of 2 m/s, calculate the distancebetween her house and the school.
7. Show the shape of the distance-time graph for the motion in the
following cases:
(i) A car moving with a constant speed.
(ii) A car parked on a side road.
8. Which of the following relations is correct?
(i) Speed = Distance × Time (ii) Speed = 
Distance
Time
(iii) Speed = Time
Distance(iv) Speed = 1
Distance Time 
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 1069. The basic unit of speed is:
(i) km/min (ii)m/min
(iii) km/h (iv) m/s
10. A car moves with a speed of 40 km/h for 15 minutes and then with a
speed of 60 km/h for the next 15 minutes. The total distance covered by
the car is:
(i) 100 km (ii) 25 km
(iii) 15 km (iv) 10 km
11. Suppose the two photographs, shown in Fig. 9.1 and Fig. 9.2, had
been taken at an interval of 10 seconds. If a distance of 100 metresis shown by 1 cm in these photographs, calculate the speed of thefastest car.
12. Fig. 9.15 shows the distance-time graph for the motion of two vehicles
A and B. Which one of them is moving faster?
(i) (ii)Fig. 9.15 Distance-time graph for the motion of two cars
13. Which of the following distance-time graphs shows a truck moving with
speed which is not constant?
Reprint 2024-25

MOTION  AND TIME 107Extend Learning — Activities and Projects
1. You can make your own sundial and use it to mark the time of the day
at your place. First of all find the latitude of your city with the help of an
atlas. Cut out a triangular piece of a cardboard such that its one angleis equal to the latitude of your place and the angle opposite to it is aright angle. Fix this piece, called gnomon , vertically along a diameter of
a circular board a shown in Fig. 9.16. One way to fix the gnomon couldbe to make a groove along a diameter on the circular board.
Next, select an open space, which receives sunlight for most of the day.
Mark a line on the ground along the North-South direction. Place thesundial in the sun as shown in Fig. 9.16.  Mark the position of the tip ofthe shadow of the gnomon on the circular board as early in the day aspossible, say 8:00 AM . Mark the position of the tip of the shadow every
hour throughout the day. Draw lines to connect each point marked byyou with the centre of the base of the gnomon as shown in Fig. 9.16.Extend the lines on the circular board up to its periphery. You can usethis sundial to read the time of the day at your place. Remember thatthe gnomon should always be placed in the North-South direction asshown in Fig. 9.16.
Fig. 9.16(iii) (iv)
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 108Did you know?
The time-keeping services in India are provided by the National Physical
Laboratory, New Delhi. The clock they use can measure time intervalswith an accuracy of one-millionth of a second. The most accurate clockin the world has been developed by the National Institute of Standardsand Technology in the U.S.A. This clock will lose or gain one second afterrunning for 20 million years.Fig. 9.17
2. Collect information about time-measuring devices that were used in
the ancient times in different parts of the world. Prepare a brief write upon each one of them. The write up may include the name of the device,the place of its origin, the period when it was used, the unit in whichthe time was measured by it and a drawing or a photograph of thedevice, if available.
3. Make a model of a sand clock which can measure a time interval of 2
minutes (Fig. 9.17).
4. You can perform an interesting activity when you visit a park to ride a
swing. You will require a watch. Make the swing oscillate withoutanyone sitting on it. Find its time period in the same way as you did forthe pendulum. Make sure that there are no jerks in the motion of theswing. Ask one of your friends to sit on the swing. Pushit once and let it swing naturally.  Again measure its time period.Repeat the activity with different persons sitting on the swing. Comparethe time period of the swing measured in different cases. Whatconclusions do you draw from this activity?
Reprint 2024-25

