SCIENCE
TEXTBOOK  FOR CLASS VII
Reprint 2024-25

First Edition
January 2007  Magha 1928
Reprinted
November 2007, January 2009
January 2010, January 2011
January 2012, December 2012
October 2013, December 2014
December 2015, February 2017
December 2017, December 2018
September 2019, January 2021
August 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
December 2022 Agrahayana 1944
Reprinted
March 2024, Chaitra 1946
PD 700T  SU
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007, 2022
` 65.00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold,
hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which it is published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICA TION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 0 85 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication :Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor :Shveta Uppal
Chief Production :Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business :Amitabh Kumar
Manager (In charge)
Assistant Production :Rajesh Pippal
Officer
Cover , Layout and Illustrations
Ashwani TyagiISBN  81-7450-654-3758 – S CIENCE
Textbook for Class 7
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCER T
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Kalyan
Enterprises, D-20, Sector B-3, Tronica
City Industrial Area, Loni, District
Ghaziabad - 201 102 (U.P .)
Reprint 2024-25

FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks adeparture from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic
idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take ussignificantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined
in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as thesole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour inimplementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for childpsychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the Textbook Development Committee responsible for thisbook. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Science and
Mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Prof. V.B. Bhatia for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel.We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee,
Reprint 2024-25

appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an
organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the
quality of its products, the NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational20 November 2006 Research and Trainingiv
Reprint 2024-25

RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT
IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducingthe content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomesalready developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken intoconsideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in
the same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same
subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out
the changes given above.
Reprint 2024-25

Blank
Reprint 2024-25

PREFACE
This book is the outcome of the efforts of the Textbook Development Committee appointed
by the NCERT. The committee met a few times to interact with one another to improve the
draft. Then there was a review meeting in which many experts and practicing schoolteachers were invited to review the draft and suggest improvements.
By and large we have stuck to the format of the Class VI book. By now, famous
characters, Boojho and Paheli, have been used to make the text interactive. Attempt has
been made to recall children’s own experiences and build concepts around them. This is
designed to connect science that they study in the school with their every-day life.
Many activities have been suggested to clarify concepts. Some of these activities are so
simple that children can perform them on their own. The requirement of the apparatusrequired for the activities is minimal. We performed all the activities ourselves to ensure
that there was no difficulty in performing them in the school situation. The activities should
also help children in developing skills such as presentation of data in tabular and
graphical forms, reasoning and drawing inference from the given data.
The language of the book has been kept as simple as possible. A large number of
photographs, illustrations, cartoons, etc. have been included to make the book attractive.To help teachers evaluate children effectively, a large number of exercises have been given
at the end of each chapter. The teachers are encouraged to frame additional exercises to
test children’s understanding. Some challenging exercises have also been devised for those
children who would like to appear for the National Talent Search Examination conductedby the NCERT.
We are conscious of the fact that there is a paucity of additional reading material for
children. We have tried to address this problem by providing non-evaluative  boxes . These
boxes, in blue, contain additional information, anecdotes, stories, strange facts and othersuch interesting materials.
We all know that children are mischievous and playful by nature. Therefore, in order to
prevent any untoward incident during the performance of the activities in the school oroutside, necessary cautions, in red, have been inserted at various places in the book.
To prepare children to assume their roles as responsible citizens of tomorrow, attempt
has been made to sensitise them to the issues concerning gender, religion, environment,
health and hygiene, water scarcity and energy conservation. We have sought to weave into
the text the value of cooperation and the importance of peer learning.
An important feature of the book is what we call ‘Extended Learning’ . These are totally
non-evaluative, and purely voluntary activities and projects. Some of the projects in thissection have been designed to enhance children’s interaction with the experts, teachers,
even parents, and society at large. The children are required to collect information of
various kind and draw conclusions of their own.
My request to teachers and parents is to use the book in the spirit in which it has been
written. Encourage children to perform activities and learn by doing, rather than by rote.
Reprint 2024-25

You can supplement, or even replace, the activities given here. If you feel that you have
better alternatives, especially with your local/regional flavour, please write to us so that
these activities could be used in the future editions of the book.
We have been able to include only a small subset of children’s experiences. You have a
better knowledge of their experiences because you are in touch with them. Use them to
illustrate the concepts being taught. Above all, please do not stifle children’s natural
curiosity. Encourage them to ask questions, even if sometimes you feel uncomfortable. If
you do not know the answer to a question on the spot, do not feel embarrassed. You canpromise them to find the answer and deal with it later. Make a genuine attempt to get the
answer from whatever resources are within your reach, such as senior school or college
teachers, experts, libraries, internet, etc. If, in spite of your efforts, you cannot get the
answer to some question, you could write to NCERT.
I must thank the NCERT for enabling us to talk to children through the medium of this
book. Every member of the NCERT has been courteous and helpful to us. If you find thisbook useful and enjoy teaching/learning science through this book, the Editing Team and
I shall consider ourselves well-rewarded.
V.B. B
HATIA
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committeeviii
Reprint 2024-25

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY  GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS  IN SCIENCE  AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor,  Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
    (IUCCA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
V.B. Bhatia, Professor, Retd.  (Physics),   Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBERS
Bharati Sarkar, Reader, Retd.  (Zoology), Maitreyi College, Delhi University, Delhi
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM),
NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
D. Lahiry, Professor, Retd, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
G.P. Pande, Uttarakhand Seva Nidhi, Paryavaran Shiksha Sansthan, Jakhan Devi, Almora,
    Uttaranchal
Harsh Kumari, Headmistress,  CIE Experimental Basic School, Department of Education,
    Delhi University, DelhiJ.S. Gill, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Kamal Deep Peter, TGT (Science), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bengaluru
Kanhiya Lal, Principal, Retd., Directorate of Education, Delhi
Lalita S. Kumar, Reader (Chemistry), School of Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
Mohd. Iftikhar Alam, TGT (Science), Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya (No.1), Jama Masjid, DelhiP.S. Yadava, Professor, Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University, Imphal
R. Joshi, Lecturer (Selection Grade), DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Rachna Garg, Lecturer, DESM, Central Institute of Educational Technology, NCERT, Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New DelhiRanjana Agrawal, Principal Scientist and Head, Division of Forecasting Techniques,
Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, IARI Campus, Pusa, New DelhiR.S. Sindhu, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Ruchi Verma, Lecturer, PPMED, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Sarita Kumar, Reader (Zoology),  Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, Delhi
Sunila Masih, Teacher, Mitra GHS School, Suhagpur, P.O. Hoshangabad,  Madhya Pradesh
V.K. Gupta, Reader (Chemistry), Hans Raj College, Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBER -COORDINATOR
R.K. Parashar, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Reprint 2024-25

Reprint 2024-25

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations
involved in the development of Science textbook for Class VII. The Council
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewing
and refining the manuscripts of this book: Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal,
Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari Nagar (Clock Tower), New Delhi; Mohini Bindra,Principal, Ramjas School, Pusa Road, New Delhi; D.K. Bedi, Principal, Apeejay
Senior Secondary School, Pitampura, Road No. 42, Sainik Vihar, New Delhi;
Chand Vir Singh, Lecturer  (Biology),  GBSS School, Rajouri Garden (Main),
New Delhi; Renuka Madan, TGT (Physics ), Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute,
Subroto Park, Delhi Cantt; Reena Jhani, TGT (Science), Darbari Lal DAV Model
School, Pitampura, New Delhi; Geeta Bajaj, TGT (Science),  K. V. No. 3,
Delhi Cantt., New Delhi; Gagandeep Bajaj, Lecturer,  Department of Education,
S.P.M. College, Delhi University, Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Lecturer , DESM, NCERT,
New Delhi; A.K. Bakhshi, Professor , Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi,
Delhi; N. Rathnasree, Director, Nehru Planetarium, Teen Murti Bhavan, New Delhi;
S.B. Singh, TGT (Science), J.N.V. Sonikpur, P.O. Trivediganj, Distt. Barabanki,Uttar Pradesh; Madhur Mohan Ranga, Lecturer (Selection Scale), (Zoology),
Govt. College, Ajmer, Rajasthan; K.G. Ojha, Associate Professor,  Department of
Chemistry, M.D.S. University, Ajmer, Rajasthan; Puneeta Sharma, TGT (Science) ,
L.D. Jain Girls Senior Secondary School, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi; Manohar Lal Patel,
Teacher,  Govt. R.N.A. Exc. H.S.S. Pipariya, Distt. Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh;
Bharat Bhushan Gupta, PGT (Biology),  Sarvodaya Vidyalaya, No.1, Shakurpur,
Delhi; Sushma Jairath, Reader, Department of Women Studies (DWS), NCERT,
New Delhi; Mina Yadav, Lecturer , DWS, NCERT, New Delhi; Swadesh Taneja,
Ex-Reader (Life Sciences), IGNOU, New Delhi and M.M. Kapur, Professor, Retd.
(Chemistry),  Delhi University, Delhi. The  contributions of Pramila Tanwar,
R.R. koireng and Ashish K. Srivastava, Assistant Professors ,  are acknowledged
for being a part of the review of this textbook.
The Council is highly thankful to the India Meteorological Department,
New Delhi, for providing some illustrations for the Chapter 8: Winds, Storms and
Cyclones. The Council gratefully acknowledges the valuable suggestions received
from the National Monitoring Committee in the development of the manuscript
of this textbook.
The dynamic leadership of Professor Hukum Singh, Head,  DESM, for
providing guidance in the final editing of the manuscript and extendinginfrastructure facilities is highly acknowledged. Special thanks are due toShveta Uppal, Chief Editor;  and Bijnan Sutar, Assistant Editor, for  going through
the manuscript and suggesting relevant changes.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Reprint 2024-25

The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor, Incharge,
Computer Station;  Purnendu Kumar Barik, Musarrat Parveen and Satish Kumar
Mishra, Copy Editors; Neelam Walecha and Muhammad Aiyub, DTP Operators ;
and Randhir Thakur , Proof Reader.
The contribution of APC-office, administration of DESM, Publication
Department and Secretariat of NCERT is also acknowledged.xii
Reprint 2024-25

The team of Paheli and Boojho will be
with you as you journey through this
textbook. They love to ask questions.
All kind of questions come to theirminds and they collect them in theirsacks. Sometimes, they may share
some of these questions with you, as
you read through the chapters.
Paheli and Boojho are also on the
lookout for answers to many
questions — sometimes the questions
seem answered after they discussthem with each other, sometimesthrough discussions with other
classmates, teachers or their parents.
Answers to some questions do notseem available even after all these. They might need to experiment on their own,read books in the library, send questions to scientists. Just dig and dig and dig
into all possibilities and see if the questions can be answered. Perhaps, they
would carry some of the unanswered questions in their sacks to higher classes.
What will really thrill them would be your adding questions to their sacks  or
answers to their questions. Sometimes, activities are suggested in the textbook,
results or findings of these by different groups of students would be of interest to
other students and teachers. You can complete the suggested activities and sendyour results or findings to Paheli and Boojho. Do keep in mind that activitiesthat involve using blades, scissors or fire need to be done strictly under the care
of your teachers. Stick to the precautions given and then enjoy doing all the
suggested activities. Mind, the book will not be able to help you much, if theactivities are not completed!
We would like to advise you that you must make observations yourself and
record whatever results you get. Keen and true observations are necessary forexploring any subject of study. For somereason your results may turn out to bedifferent from those of your classmates.
Do not worry. Try to find out the reason
for these results instead of disregardingthem. Do not ever copy results from yourclassmate.
You can send your feedback for
Paheli and Boojho at:A NOTE FOR THE STUDENTS
 
To
The Head
Department of Education inScience and Mathematics,NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg,New Delhi 110 016
Reprint 2024-25

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers,
wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his child or,
as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
Part  IV A (Article  51 A)
Reprint 2024-25

CONTENTS
FOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION  OF CONTENT  IN THE TEXTBOOKS v
PREFACE vii
Chapter  1
Nutrition in Plants 1
Chapter  2
Nutrition in Animals 11
Chapter  3
Heat 24
Chapter  4Acids, Bases and Salts 38
Chapter  5
Physical and Chemical Changes 47
Chapter  6
Respiration in Organisms 57
Chapter  7
Transportation in Animals and Plants 70
Chapter  8
Reproduction in Plants 82
Chapter  9
Motion and Time 92
Chapter  10
Electric Current and its Effects 109
Reprint 2024-25

Chapter  11
Light 123
Chapter  12
Forests: Our Lifeline 142
Chapter  13
Wastewater Story 156xvi
Reprint 2024-25

