LIGHT 123Light11
You might have seen a beam of
sunlight when it enters a room
through a narrow opening or a hole.
You may have also seen beams of light from
the headlamps of scooters, cars and engines
of trains [Fig. 11.1 (a)]. Similarly, a beam
of light can be seen from a torch. Some of
(a) Rail engine
Fig. 11.1  Beams of light
(b) Light house
Fig. 11.2  Looking at a candle through a straight and a bent pipeyou may have seen a beam of searchlightfrom a light house or from an airport
tower [Fig. 11.1 (b)].
What do these experiences suggest?11.1 L IGHT TRAVELS  ALONG  A
STRAIGHT  LINE
Boojho recalls an activity he performedin Class VI. In that activity he looked
(a) (b)
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 124Fig. 11.3  Reflection of objects in water
at a lighted candle first through
a straight pipe and then through
a bent pipe (Fig. 11.2). Why was
Boojho not able to see the candleflame through a bent pipe?
This activity showed that
light travels along straight lines.
How can we change the path
of light? Do you know, whathappens when light falls on apolished or a shiny surface?
11.2  R EFLECTION  OF LIGHT
One way to change the directionof light is to let it fall on a shiny
surface. For example, a shining
stainless steel plate or a shiningsteel spoon can change the
direction of light. The surface of
water can also act like a mirrorand change the path of light.
Have you ever seen the reflection
of trees or buildings in water(Fig. 11.3)?Any polished or a shiny surface can
act as a mirror. What happens whenlight falls on a mirror?
You have learnt in Class VI that a
mirror changes the direction of light thatfalls on it. This change of direction by a
mirror is called reflection of light. Can
you recall the activity in which you got
the light of a torch reflected from a
mirror? Let us perform a similar activity.
Activity 11.1
Take a torch. Cover its glass with a chart
paper which has three narrow slits asshown in Fig. 11.5. Spread a sheet of
Paheli remembers the story of the lion and therabbit from the Panchtantra, in which the
rabbit fooled the lion by showing him his
reflection in water (Fig. 11.4).
Fig. 11.4  Reflection of the lion in water
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 125chart paper on a smooth wooden board.
Fix a plane mirror strip vertically on thechart paper (Fig. 11.5). Now direct the
beam of light on the mirror from the
torch with slits. Place the torch in sucha way that its light is seen along the
chart paper on the board. Now adjust
its position so that the light from thetorch strikes the plane mirror at an
angle (Fig. 11.5).
Does the mirror change the direction
of light that falls on it? Now move thetorch slightly to either side. Do you find
any change in the direction of reflectedlight?Look into the mirror along the
direction of the reflected light. Do you
see the slits in the mirror? This is the
image of the slits.
This activity shows how light gets
reflected from a plane mirror.
Let us play around with the images
formed in mirrors and know a little more
about them.
Fig. 11.6  Image of a candle in a plane mirrorFig. 11.5  Reflection of light from a mirror
Paheli wants to know, what
makes things visible to us?
Boojho thinks that objects are
visible only when light reflected
from them reaches our eyes. Do
you agree with him?
CAUTION
Handle the lighted candle with care.
It is better if this activity is performed
in the presence of a teacher or an elder
person.
Place a lighted candle in front of a plane
mirror. Try to see the flame of the candle
in the mirror. It appears as if a similar
candle is placed behind the mirror. Thecandle, which appears behind the
mirror, is the image of the candle formed
by the mirror (Fig. 11.6). The candleitself is the object.
Now move the candle to different
positions in front of the mirror. Observe
the image in each case.Activity 11.2
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 126
cannot be obtained on the screen in
either case.
What about the distance of the image
from mirror? Let us perform anotheractivity.
Activity 11.3
Take a chess board. If a chess board isnot available, draw on a chart paper 64
(8×8) squares of equal size. Draw a thick
line in the middle of the paper. Fix a
plane mirror vertically on this line. Place
any small object, such as a pencil
sharpner, at the boundary of the thirdsquare counting from the mirror
(Fig. 11.7). Note the position of the
image. Now shift the object to theboundary of the fourth square. Again
note the position of the image. Did you
find any relation between the distanceof the image from the mirror and that of
the object in front of it?Was the image upright in each case?
Did the flame appear on top of the candle
as in the object? Such an image is callederect . An image formed by a plane
mirror is erect and of the same size asthe object.
Now place a vertical screen behind
the mirror. Try to obtain the image ofthe candle on this screen. Can you getthe image on the screen? Now place the
screen in front of the mirror. Can you
get the image on the screen now? Youwill find that the image of the candle
Boojho noted in his notebook: Is
it not surprising that my image is
of the same size as me whether
the mirror is small or large?
Fig. 11.7  Locating image in a plane mirror
Paheli made a note in her notebook:
In a plane mirror the image is
formed behind the mirror. It is erect,
of the same size and is at the same
distance from the mirror as the
object is in front of it.
You will find that the image
is at the same distance behindthe mirror as the object is in frontof it. Now verify this by placing
the object anywhere on the chart
paper.
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 127
Fig. 11.8  Left hand appears on the right side
in the imageFig. 11.9  An ambulance
mirror. How does it appear in the
mirror?11.3  R IGHT OR LEFT!
When you see your image in a plane
mirror, is it exactly like you? Have you
ever noticed that there is one interesting
difference between you and your imagein a mirror? Let us find out.
Activity 11.4
Stand in front of a plane mirror and lookat your image. Raise your left hand.Which hand does your image raise
(Fig. 11.8)? Now touch your right ear.
Which ear does your hand touch in yourimage? Observe carefully. You will find
that in the mirror the ‘right’ appears ‘left’
and the ‘left’ appears ‘right’. Note thatonly sides are interchanged; the image
does not appear upside down.
Now write down your name on a piece
of paper and hold it in front of a plane
Boojho saw an ambulance on
the road. He was surprised to
see that the word ‘AMBULANCE’
in front was written in a strange
manner.
Can you now understand
why the word ‘AMBULANCE’ is written
as in Fig. 11.9 ? When the driver of a
vehicle ahead of an ambulance looks in
her/his rear view mirror, she/he canread ‘AMBULANCE’ written on it and
give way to it. It is the duty of every one
of us to allow an ambulance to passwithout blocking its way.
You might have observed that in the
side mirror of a scooter or a car theimages of all the objects appear smaller
than the objects themselves. Have you
ever wondered why is it so?
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 12811.4 P LAYING  WITH SPHERICAL
MIRRORS
Paheli and Boojho were waiting for their
dinner. Boojho lifted a stainless steel
plate and saw his image in it. Oh! This
plate acts as a plane mirror. My imageis erect and is of the same size. Paheli
saw her image using the back of a steel
spoon. “Boojho look here! I can also seemy erect image though it is smaller in
size. This spoon also acts as a mirror of
some kind”, said Paheli.
You can also use a spoon or any
curved shining surface to see yourimage.
Activity 11.5
Take a stainless steel spoon. Bring the
outer side of the spoon near your face
and look into it. Do you see your imagein it (Fig. 11.10)? Is this image different
from what you see in a plane mirror? Is
this image erect? Is the size of the imagethe same, smaller or larger?
Fig. 11.10  Image from the outer side of a spoonFig. 11.11  Image from the inner side of a
spoon
Fig. 11.12  (a) A concave and (b) a convex mirrorNow look at your image using the
inner side of the spoon. This time youmay find that your image is erect and
larger in size. If you increase the distance
of the spoon from your face, you maysee your image inverted (Fig. 11.11). You
can also compare the image of your pen
or pencil instead of your face.
The curved shining surface of a spoon
acts as a mirror. The most commonexample of a curved mirror is a sphericalmirror.
If the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is concave, it is called a concavemirror. If the reflecting surface is convex,
then it is a convex mirror (Fig. 11.12).
(a) (b)
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 129CAUTION
You will conduct Activity 11.6 in the
sunlight. Be careful, never lookdirectly towards the Sun or its image
as it may damage your eyes. You may
look at the image of the Sun when itis thrown on a screen or a wall.The inner surface of a spoon acts like
a concave mirror, while its outer surfaceacts like a convex mirror.
We know that the image of an object
formed by a plane mirror cannot beobtained on a screen. Let us investigateif it is also true for the image formed by
a concave mirror.
Activity 11.6Fig. 11.14  A concave mirror forms a real image
of the sun
Take a concave mirror. Hold it facing
the Sun. Try to get the light reflected bythe mirror on a sheet of paper. Adjust
the distance of the paper until you get a
sharp bright spot on it (Fig. 11.14). Holdthe mirror and the sheet of paper steady
for a few minutes. Does the paper start
burning?
This bright spot is, in fact, the image
of the Sun. Notice that this image isformed on a screen. An image formedon a screen is called a real image .
Recollect that in Activity 11.2 the imageformed by a plane mirror could not beobtained on a screen. Such an image is
called a virtual image .
Now let us try to obtain on the screen
the image of a candle flame formed by aconcave mirror.
Activity 11.7
Fix a concave mirror on a stand (any
arrangement to keep the mirror steady
would do) and place it on a table
(Fig. 11.15). Paste a piece of white paperon a cardboard sheet (say aboutWhy are concave and convex mirrors
called spherical mirrors?
Take a rubber ball and cut a
portion of it with a knife or a hack-saw blade [Fig. 11.13 (a)].  (Be careful.
Ask an elder person to help you in
cutting the ball). The inner surface
of the cut ball is called concave and
the outer surface is called convex(Fig. 11.13 (b)).
Fig. 11.13  A spherical mirror is a part of
a sphere(a) (b)Convex surface
Concave surface
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 13015 cm  × 10 cm). This will act as a screen.
Keep a lighted candle on the table at a
distance of about 50 cm from the mirror.
Try to obtain the image of the flame onthe screen. For this, move the screen till
a sharp image of the flame is obtained.
Make sure that, the screen does notFig. 11.15  Real images formed by a concave mirror
obstruct the light from the candle fallingon the mirror. Is this image real orvirtual? Is it of the same size as the flame?
Now move the candle towards the
mirror and place it at different distancesfrom it. In each case try to obtain the
image on the screen. Record your
observation in Table 11.1. Is it possibleto obtain the image on the screen when
the candle is too close to the mirror
(Fig. 11.16)?
We see that the image formed by a
concave mirror can be smaller or largerin size than the object. The image mayalso be real or virtual.
Concave mirrors are used for many
purposes. You might have seen doctorsusing concave mirrors for examining
eyes, ears, nose and throat. Concave
mirrors are also used by dentiststo see an enlarged image of the teeth
(Fig. 11.17). The reflectors of torches,
headlights of cars and scooters areconcave in shape (Fig. 11.18).
Fig. 11.16  Virtual image formed by a concave
mirror
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 131Boojho observed his image in the
shiny surface of the bell on his new
bicycle. He found that his image was
erect and smaller in size. He wonderedif the bell is also a kind of spherical
mirror. Can you recognise the type ofthe mirror?
Note that the reflecting surface of the
bell is convex.
Activity 11.8
Repeat Activity 11.7 now with a convexmirror in place of a concave mirror
(Fig. 11.19). Record your observations
in a Table similar to Table 11.1.
Could you get a real image at any
distance of the object from the convex
Table 11.1 Image formed by a concave mirror for object
placed at different distances from it
Distance of the object from Smaller/larger      Character of the image
the mirror than the object Inverted/ erect Real/virtual
50 cm … …
40 cm … …
30 cm20 cm10 cm …
 5 cmFig. 11.19  Image formed by a convex mirror
Fig. 11.17  A dentist examining a patient
Fig. 11.18  Reflector of a torch
Concave surface
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 132Fig. 11.20  Convex mirror as side view mirror
mirror? Did you get an image larger in
size than the object?
Can you now recognise the mirrors
used as side mirrors in automobiles?These are convex mirrors. Convex mirrorscan form images of objects spread over a
large area. So, these help the drivers to
see the traffic behind them (Fig. 11.20).
11.5  I MAGES  FORMED  BY LENSES
You might have seen a magnifying glass.It is used to read very small print
(Fig. 11.21). You might have also used
it to observe the body parts of acockroach or an earthworm. The
magnifying glass is actually a type of a lens.
Lenses are widely used in spectacles,
telescopes and microscopes. Try to adda few more uses of lenses to this list.
Get some lenses. Touch and feel
them. Can you find some difference justby touching? Those lenses which feel
thicker in the middle than at the edgesare convex lenses [Fig. 11.22 (a)]. Thosewhich feel thinner in the middle thanat the edges are concave lenses
[Fig. 11.22 (b)]. Notice that the lenses
are transparent and light can passthrough them.
CAUTION
It is dangerous to look through a lens
at the Sun or a bright light. You
should also be careful not to focussunlight with a convex lens on any
part of your body.
Fig. 11.21  A magnifying glass
Fig. 11.22  (a) A convex lens and (b) a concave
lens(a)(b)
Let us play with lenses.
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 133
It means that we can see the
image formed by a lens from the
side opposite to that of the object.
Activity 11.9
Take a convex lens or magnifying glass.
Put it in the path of sunrays. Place a
sheet of paper as shown (Fig. 11.23).
Adjust the distance between the lens andthe paper till you get a bright spot on
the paper. Hold the lens and the paper
in this position for a few minutes. Doesthe paper begin to burn?
Now replace the convex lens with a
concave lens. Do you see a bright spotA convex lens converges (bends
inward) the light generally falling on it
[Fig. 11.24 (a)]. Therefore, it is called aconverging lens. On the other hand, a
concave lens diverges (bends outward)
the light and is called a diverging lens[Fig. 11.24 (b)].
(b)
on the paper this time, too? Why areyou not getting a bright spot this time?
We have seen in the case of mirrors
that for different positions of the objectthe nature and size of the image change.Is it true for lenses also?
Let us find out.
Activity 11.10
Take a convex lens and fix it on a standas you did with the concave mirror. Place
it on a table. Place a lighted candle at a
distance of about 50 cm from the lens[Fig. 11.25 (a)]. Try to obtain the imageFig. 11.23  Real image of the sun by a convex
lens
(a)
Fig. 11.24
of the candle on a paper screen placedon the other side of the lens. You may
have to move the screen towards or away
from the lens to get a sharp image ofthe flame. What kind of image did you
get? Is it real or virtual?
Now vary the distance of the candle
from the lens [Fig. 11.25 (b)]. Try toobtain the image of the candle flame
every time on the paper screen bymoving it. Record your observations as
you did in Activity 11.7 for the concave
mirror.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 134
Fig. 11.25  Image by a convex lens for object placed at different distance from it
(a) (b)
Fig. 11.27  Image formed by a concave lens
Fig. 11.26  Virtual image formed by
the convex lens
Did you get in any position of the
object an image which was erect and
magnified (Fig. 11.26). Could this image
be obtained on a screen? Is the image
real or virtual? This is how a convex lensis used as a magnifying glass.
In a similar fashion study the images
formed by a concave lens. You will findthat the image formed by a concave lensis always virtual, erect and smaller insize than the object (Fig. 11.27).
11.6 S UNLIGHT  — W HITE OR
COLOURED ?
Have you ever seen a rainbow in the
sky? You might have noticed that it
appears usually after the rain when theSun is low in the sky. The rainbow is
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 135
seen as a large arc in the sky with many
colours (Fig. 11.28).
How many colours are present in a
rainbow? When observed carefully, thereare seven colours in a rainbow, though
it may not be easy to distinguish all of
them. These are — red, orange, yellow,green, blue, indigo and violet.
Paheli wants to tell you
that you can see a
rainbow only when your
back is towards the sun.
You  might have seen that when you
blow soap bubbles, they appearcolourful. Similarly, when light is
reflected from the surface of a
Compact Disk (CD), you see manycolours (Fig. 11.29).
On the basis of these experiences,
could we say that the sunlight is amixture of different colours? Let us
investigate.
Activity 11.11
Take a glass prism. Allow a narrow beam
of sunlight through a small hole in thewindow of a dark room to fall on one
face of the prism. Let the light coming
out of the other face of the prism fall on
Does this mean that the
white light consists of
seven colours?
Fig. 11.28  A rainbow
Fig. 11.29  A CD placed in sun
Fig. 11.30  A prism splits a beam of sunlight into seven
colours
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 136Fig. 11.31  (a) A disc with seven colours (b) It appears white on rotating
a white sheet of paper or on a white wall.
What do you observe? Do you see colours
similar to those in a rainbow
(Fig. 11.30)? This shows that the
sunlight consists of seven colours. Thesunlight is said to be white light. This
means that the white light consists of
seven colours. Try to identify thesecolours and write their names in your
notebook.
Can we mix these colours to get white
light? Let us try.
Activity 11.12
Take a circular cardboard disc of about10 cm diameter. Divide this disc intoseven segments. Paint the sevenrainbow colours on these segmentsas shown in Fig. 11.31 (a). You canalso paste, coloured papers onthese segments. Make a small hole
at the centre of the disc. Fix the
disc loosely on the tip of a refill of aball pen. Ensure that the disc rotatesfreely [Fig. 11.31 (a)]. Rotate the discin the daylight. When the disc isrotated fast, the colours get mixed
together and the disc appears
to be whitish [Fig. 11.31 (b)]. Sucha disc is popularly known as Newton’sdisc.
Paheli has a brilliant idea! She
has prepared a small top with
a small circular disc with
seven rainbow colourspainted on it (Fig. 11.32).
When the top rotates it
appears nearly white.
Fig. 11.32  A top with seven colours
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 137
Keywords
Magnified image
Magnifying glassPrism
Rainbow
Real imageRear view mirrorSide mirror
Spherical mirror
Virtual image
What you have learnt
Light travels along straight lines.
Any polished or a shining surface acts as a mirror.
An image which can be obtained on a screen is called a real image.
An image which cannot be obtained on a screen is called a virtual image.
The image formed by a plane mirror is erect. It is virtual and is of the
same size as the object. The image is at the same distance behind themirror as the object is in front of it.
In an image formed by a mirror, the left side of the object is seen on theright side in the image, and right side of the object appears to be on theleft side in the image.
A concave mirror can form a real and inverted image. When the object isplaced very close to the mirror, the image formed is virtual, erect andmagnified.
Image formed by a convex mirror is erect, virtual and smaller in sizethan the object.
A convex lens can form real and inverted image. When the object isplaced very close to the lens, the image formed is virtual, erect andmagnified.  When used to see objects magnified, the convex lens is calleda magnifying glass.
A concave lens always forms erect, virtual and smaller image than theobject.
White light is composed of seven colours.Concave lens
Concave mirrorConvex lens
Convex mirror
Erect image
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 138Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) An image that cannot be obtained on a screen is called
____________.
(b) Image formed by a convex __________ is always virtual and smaller
in size.
(c) An image formed by a __________ mirror is always of the same size
as that of the object.
(d) An image which can be obtained on a screen is called a _________
image.
(e) An image formed by a concave ___________ cannot be obtained on
a screen.
2. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
(a) We can obtain an enlarged and erect image by a convex mirror. (T/F)
(b) A concave lens always form a virtual image. (T/F)
(c) We can obtain a real, enlarged and inverted image by a concave
mirror. (T/F)
(d) A real image cannot be obtained on a screen. (T/F)
(e) A concave mirror always form a real image. (T/F)
3. Match the items given in Column I with one or more items of Column II.
Column I Column II
(a) A plane mirror (i) Used as a magnifying glass.
(b) A convex mirror (ii) Can form image of objects
spread over a large area.
(c) A convex lens (iii) Used by dentists to see
enlarged image of teeth.
(d) A concave mirror (iv) The image is always inverted
and magnified.
(e) A concave lens (v) The image is erect and of the
same size as the object.
(vi) The image is erect and smaller
in size than the object.
4. State the characteristics of the image formed by a plane mirror.5. Find out the letters of English alphabet or any other language known to
you in which the image formed in a plane mirror appears exactly like
the letter itself. Discuss your findings.
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 1396. What is a virtual image? Give one situation where a virtual image is
formed.
7. State two differences between a convex and a concave lens.
8. Give one use each of a concave and a convex mirror.9. Which type of mirror can form a real image?
10. Which type of lens forms always a virtual image?Choose the correct option in questions 11–1311. A virtual image larger than the object can be produced by a
(i) concave lens (ii) concave mirror
(iii) convex mirror (iv) plane mirror
12. David is observing his image in a plane mirror. The distance between
the mirror and his image is 4 m. If he moves 1 m towards the mirror,
then the distance between David and his image will be
(i) 3 m (ii) 5 m
(iii) 6 m (iv) 8 m
13. The rear view mirror of a car is a plane mirror. A driver is reversing his
car at a speed of 2 m/s. The driver sees in his rear view mirror theimage of a truck parked behind his car. The speed at which the image of
the truck appears to approach the driver will be
(i) 1 m/s (ii) 2 m/s
(iii) 4 m/s (iv) 8 m/s
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Play with a mirror
Write your name with a
sketch pen on a thin sheetof paper, polythene or glass.Read your name on the sheetwhile standing in front of aplane mirror. Now look atyour image in the mirror.
2. A burning candle in water
Take a shoe box, open on oneside. Place a small lightedcandle in it. Place a clearglass sheet (roughly 25 cm ×
 25 cm) infront of this candle
(Fig. 11.33). Try to locate theimage of the candle behindFig. 11.33 Candle burning in water
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 140the glass sheet. Place a glass of water at its position. Ask your friends to
look at the image of the candle through the sheet of glass. Ensure thatcandle is not visible to your friends. Your friends will be surprised to seethe candle burning in water. Try to explain the reason.
3. Make a rainbow
Try to make your own rainbow. You can try this project in the morningor in the evening. Stand with your back towards the Sun. Take a hosepipeor a water pipe used in the garden. Make a fine spray in front of you.You can see different colours of rainbow in the spray.
4. Visit a laughing gallery in some science centre or a science park or a
village mela. You will find some large mirrors there. You can see your
distorted and funny images in these mirrors. Try to find out the kind ofmirrors used there.
5. Visit a nearby hospital. You can also visit the clinic of an ENT
specialist, or a dentist. Request the doctor to show you the mirrors usedfor examining ear, nose, throat and teeth. Can you recognise the kind ofmirror used in these instruments?
6. Role play
Here is a game that a group of children can play. One child will bechosen to act as object and another will act as the image of the object.The object and the image will sit opposite to each other. The object willmake movements, such as raising a hand, touching an ear etc. Theimage will have to make the correct movement following the movementof the object. The rest of the group will watch the movements of theimage. If the image fails to make the correct movement, she/he will beretired. Another child will take her/his place and the game willcontinue. A scoring scheme can be introduced. The group that scoresthe maximum will be declared the winner.
Reprint 2024-25

LIGHT 141Did you know?
The mirrors can be used as weapons. Archimedes, a Greek scientist, is said
to have done just that more than two thousand years ago. When theRomans attacked Syracuse, a coastal city-state in Greece, Archimedes usedmirrors arranged as shown in Fig. 11.34. The mirrors could be moved in anydirection. They were positioned such that they reflected the sunlight on theRoman soldiers. The soldiers were dazzled by the sunlight. They did notknow what was happening. They got confused and ran away. This was anexample of triumph of ideas over military might.
Fig. 11.34  Archimedes mirrors
Reprint 2024-25

