Transportation in
Animals and Plants7
You have learnt earlier that all
organisms need food, water and
oxygen for survival. They need to
transport all these to various parts of
their body. Further, animals need to
transport wastes to parts from where
they can be removed. Have youwondered how all this is achieved? Look
at Fig. 7.1. Do you see the heart and
the blood vessels? They function totransport substances and together form
the circulatory system. In this chapter,
you shall learn about transport ofsubstances in animals and plants.
7.1 C IRCULATORY  SYSTEM
Blood
What happens when you get a cut on
your body? Blood flows out. But what
is blood? Blood is the fluid which
flows in blood vessels. It transports
substances like digested food from the
small intestine to the other parts of the
body. It carries oxygen from the lungs
to the cells of the body. It also transports
waste for removal from the body.
How does the blood carry various
substances? Blood is composed of a
fluid, called plasma in which different
types of cells are suspended.
Heart
Vein
Artery
Why is the colour of
blood red?
Fig. 7.1  Circulatory system
(Arteries are shown in red colour and veins in blue)
Reprint 2024-25

TRANSPORTATION  IN ANIMALS  AND PLANTS 71One type of cells are the red blood
cells (RBC) which contain a red pigment
called haemoglobin . Haemoglobin
binds with oxygen and transports it to
all the parts of the body and ultimatelyto all the cells. It will be difficult to
provide oxygen efficiently to all the cells
of the body without haemoglobin. Thepresence of haemoglobin makes blood
appear red.
The blood also has white blood cells
(WBC) which fight against germs thatmay enter our body.
Boojho fell down while playing a
game and his knee got injured. Bloodwas coming out from the cut. After some
time, he noticed that bleeding hadstopped and a dark red clot had plugged
the cut. Boojho was puzzled about this.
The clot is formed because of the
presence of another type of cells in theblood, called platelets .
Blood vessels
There are different types of blood vesselsin the body. You know that during
inhalation a fresh supply of oxygen fillsthe lungs. Oxygen has to be transported
to the rest of the body.
Also, the blood picks up the waste
materials including carbon dioxide fromthe cells. This blood has to go back to
the heart for transport to the lungs forremoval of carbon dioxide as you have
learnt in Chapter 6. So, two types of
blood vessels,  arteries  and veins are
present in the body.  (Fig. 7.1)
Arteries  carry oxygen-rich blood
from the heart to all parts of the body.Since the blood flow is rapid and at ahigh pressure, the arteries have thickelastic walls.
Let us perform an activity to study
the flow of blood through arteries.
Activity 7.1
Place the middle and index finger ofyour right hand on the inner side of your
left wrist (Fig. 7.2). Can you feel some
throbbing movements? Why do youthink there is throbbing? This
throbbing is called the pulse and it is
due to the blood flowing in the arteries.Count the number of pulse beats in one
minute.
How many pulse beats could you
count? The number of beats per minuteis called the pulse rate . A resting
person, usually has a pulse rate between
72 and 80 beats per minute. Find other
places in your body where you can feel
the pulse.
Record your own pulse beats per
minute and those of your classmates.Insert the values you obtained inTable 7.1 and compare them.
Fig. 7.2  Pulse in the wrist
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 72Table 7.1 Pulse rate
S. No. Name Pulse per minute
1.
2.
3.
4.5.
Paheli explained that the
pulmonary artery carries blood
from the heart, so it is called an
artery and not a vein. It carries
carbon dioxide-rich blood to the
lungs. Pulmonary vein carries
oxygen-rich blood from the
lungs to the heart. 
Veins  are the vessels which carry
carbon dioxide-rich blood from all parts
of the body back to the heart. The veins
have thin walls. There are valves presentin veins which allow blood to flow only
towards the heart.
Refer to Fig. 7.3. Do you see the
arteries divide into smaller vessels? On
reaching the tissues, they divide further
into extremely thin tubes called
capillaries . The capillaries join to form
veins which empty into the heart.
Heart
The heart is an organ which beats
continuously to act as a pump for the
transport of blood, which carries othersubstances with it.
Imagine a pump working for
years without stopping! Absolutelyimpossible. Yet our heart works like a
pump non-stop. Let us now learn about
the heart.
The heart is located in the chest
cavity with its lower tip slightly tiltedtowards the left (Fig. 7.1). Hold yourfingers inwards on your palm. That
CapillariesVein
ArteryHeartLungs
I am confused! I have learnt
that an artery always
carries oxygen-rich blood. 
Pulmonary
arteryPulmonary
vein
Fig. 7.3  Schematic diagram of circulation
Blood Donation
Hundreds of people die due to
unavailability of blood. Voluntary
blood donation is harmless and
painless and can save precious lives.
Blood can be donated at hospitals andother places authorised by the
government. Donated blood are stored
with special care in Blood Banks.
Reprint 2024-25

TRANSPORTATION  IN ANIMALS  AND PLANTS 73makes your fist. Your heart is roughly
the size of your fist.
What will happen if the blood rich in
oxygen and the blood rich in carbondioxide mix with each other? To avoidthis from happening, the heart has fourchambers. The two upper chambers arecalled the atria (singular: atrium) and
the two lower chambers are called the
ventricles  (Fig. 7.4). The partition
between the chambers  helps to avoid
Paheli wonders which side of
the heart will have oxygen-rich
blood and which side will have
carbon dioxide-rich blood.
Fig. 7.4  Sections of human heart
Vena Cava
Right atrium
Right ventriclePartition completely
separating the twohalvesLeft atrium
Left ventriclePulmonary artery
Pulmonary vein
mixing up of blood rich in oxygen with
the blood rich in carbon dioxide.
To understand the functioning of the
circulatory system, start from the rightside of the heart in Fig. 7.3 and follow
the arrows. These arrows show thedirection of the blood flow from the heartAorta
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 74to the lungs and back to the heart from
where it is pumped to the rest of thebody.
Heartbeat
The walls of the chambers of the heart
are made up of muscles. These muscles
contract and relax rhythmically. Thisrhythmic contraction followed by its
relaxation constitute a heartbeat.
Remember that heartbeats continueevery moment of our life. If you place
your hand on the left side of your chest,
you can feel your heartbeat. The doctorfeels your heartbeats with the help of
an instrument called a stethoscope.
A doctor uses the stethoscope as a
device to amplify the sound of the heart.It consists of a chest piece that carries a
sensitive diaphragm, two ear pieces anda tube joining the parts. Doctors can
get clues about the condition of yourheart by listening through a
stethoscope.
Let us construct a model of a
stethoscope with the materials that areavailable around us.
Activity 7.2
Take a small funnel of 6–7 cm indiameter. Fix a rubber tube (50 cm long)
tightly on the stem of the funnel. Stretch
a rubber sheet (or a balloon) on themouth of the funnel and fix it tightly
with a rubber band. Put the open end
of the tube on one of your ears. Place
Table 7.2 Heartbeat and pulse rate
Name of student While resting After running (4–5 minutes)
Heartbeat Pulse rate Heartbeat Pulse rate
Fig. 7.5  Instrument to hear heartbeat (a) Stethoscope
 (b) Model of
stethoscopeChest Piece
Ear PieceTube
Reprint 2024-25

TRANSPORTATION  IN ANIMALS  AND PLANTS 75the mouth of the funnel on your chest
near the heart. Now try to listencarefully. Do you hear a regular
thumping sound ? The sound is that of
heart beats. How many times did yourheart beat in a minute ? Count again
after running for 4–5 minutes. Compare
your observations.
Record your own pulse rate and heart
beat and that of your friends whileresting and after running and record inTable 7.2. Do you find any relationship
between your heart beat and pulse rate?
Each heart beat generates one pulse inthe arteries and the pulse rate per
minute indicates the rate of heart beat.
The rhythmic beating of the various
chambers of the heart maintaincirculation of blood and transport of
substances to the different parts of thebody.
Boojho wonders if sponges and
hydra  also have blood? Animals such
as sponges and Hydra do not possess
any circulatory system. The water inwhich they live brings food and oxygenas it enters their bodies. The watercarries away waste materials and carbondioxide as it moves out. Thus, these
animals do not need a circulatory fluid
like the blood.
Let us now learn about the removal
of waste other than carbon dioxide.
7.2 E XCRETION  IN ANIMALS
Recall how carbon dioxide is removed
as waste from the body through the
lungs during exhalation. Also recall thatthe undigested food is removed during
egestion. Let us now find out how the
other waste materials are removed fromthe body. You may wonder where these
unwanted materials come from!
When our cells perform their
functions, certain waste products arereleased. These are toxic and hence need
to be removed from the body. Theprocess of removal of wastes produced
in the cells of the living organisms is
called excretion . The parts involved in
excretion form the excretory system .
Excretory system in humans
The waste which is present in the blood
has to be removed from the body. How
can this be done? A mechanism to filterthe blood is required. This is done by
the blood capillaries in the kidneys .
When the blood reaches the two kidneys,
it contains both useful and harmful
substances. The useful substances are
absorbed back into the blood. Thewastes dissolved in water are removed
as urine . From the kidneys, the urine
goes into the urinary bladder throughThe English physician, William Harvey
(A.D.1578–1657), discovered thecirculation of blood. The current
opinion in those days was that blood
oscillates in the vessels of the body.For his views, Harvey was ridiculed
and was called “circulator”. He lost
most of his patients. However, beforehe died, Harvey’s idea about
circulation was generally accepted as
a biological fact.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 76Sometimes a person’s kidneys may
stop working due to infection or
injury. As a result of kidney failure,
waste products start accumulating inthe blood. Such persons cannot
survive unless their blood is filtered
periodically through an artificialkidney. This process is called dialysis .tube-like ureters . It is stored in the
bladder and is passed out through the
urinary opening at the end of a
muscular tube called urethra  (Fig. 7.6).
The kindeys, ureters, bladder and
urethra form the excretory system.
An adult human being normally
passes about 1–1.8 L of urine in 24hours. The urine consists of 95% water,
2.5% urea and 2.5% other wasteproducts.
We have all experienced that we sweat
on a hot summer day. The sweat
Paheli wants to know
whether other animals also
urinate?
The way in which waste chemicals
are removed from the body of the
animal depends on the availabilityof water. Aquatic animals like fishes,
excrete cell waste as ammonia which
directly dissolves in water. Someland animals like birds, lizards,
snakes excrete a semi-solid, white
coloured compound (uric acid). Themajor excretory product in humans
is urea.Fig. 7.6   Human excretory system
Kidney
Ureter
Urinary bladder
Urethracontains water and salts. Boojho has
seen that sometimes in summer, whitepatches are formed on our clothes,
especially in areas like underarms.
These marks are left by salts present inthe sweat.
Does sweat serve any other function?
We know that the water kept in anearthen pot ( matka ) is cooler. This is
because the water evaporates from thepores of the pot, which causes cooling.
Urinary opening
Reprint 2024-25

TRANSPORTATION  IN ANIMALS  AND PLANTS 77
Similarly, when we sweat, it helps to cool
our body.
7.3 T RANSPORT  OF SUBSTANCES  IN
PLANTS
In Chapter 1 you learnt that plants takewater and mineral nutrients from the soilthrough the roots and transport it to the
leaves. The leaves prepare food for the
plant, using water and carbon dioxide
during photosynthesis. You also learnt in
Chapter 6 that food is the source of energy
and every cell of an organism gets energyby the breakdown of glucose. The cells
use this energy to carry out vital activitiesof life. Therefore food must be madeavailable to every cell of an organism.
Have you ever wondered how water and
nutrients absorbed by the root aretransported to the leaves? How is the
food prepared by the leaves carried to
the parts which cannot make food?
Transport of water and
minerals
Plants absorb water and minerals by
the roots. The roots have root hair.The root hair increase the surface areaof the root for the absorption of waterand mineral nutrients dissolved in
water. The root hair is in contact with
the water present between the soilparticles [Fig. 7.7 (a)].
Can you guess how water moves
from the root to the leaves? What kindof transport system is present in plants?
Boojho thinks that plants
may have pipes to transport
water to the entire plant like
we have in our homes for the
supply of water.
(a)(b)
Xylem vesselsFig. 7.7  Transport of water and minerals in
(a) a section of root, (b) a treeRoot hair
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 78
Well, Boojho is right. Plants have
pipe-like vessels to transport water and
nutrients from the soil. The vessels are
made of special cells, forming the
vascular tissue . A tissue is a group of
cells that perform specialised function
in an organism. The vascular tissue for
the transport of water and nutrients in theplant is called the xylem [Fig. 7.7 (a)].
The xylem forms a continuous
network of channels that connects rootsto the leaves through the stem and
branches and thus transports water to
the entire plant [Fig. 7.7 (b)].
Paheli says her mother puts
ladyfinger and other vegetables in
water if they are somewhat dry.
She wants to know how water
enters into them.
Boojho wants to know why
plants absorb a large quantity
of water from the soil, then give
it off by transpiration!
Fig. 7.8 (a) Stem placed in coloured water
Does any part of the herb appear
red? If yes, how do you think the colourreached there?
You can cut the stem across and look
for the red colour inside the stem(Fig. 7.8(b) and 7.8(c)).
From this activity we see that water
moves up the stem. In other words, stemconducts water. Just like the red ink,minerals dissolved in water also move
up the stem, along with water. Water
and minerals go to leaves and otherplant parts, through narrow tubes
(xylem) inside the stem (Fig. 7.7(b)).You know that leaves synthesise
food. The food has to be transported to
all parts of the plant. This is done by
the vascular tissue called the phloem .
Thus, xylem and phloem transport
substances in plants.
Activity 7.3
We would require a glass tumbler, water,
red ink, a tender herb (e.g., Balsam),
and a blade for this activity.
Pour water to fill one-third of the
tumbler. Add a few drops of red ink tothe water. Cut the base of the stem ofthe herb and place it in the glass as shown
in Fig. 7.8(a). Observe it the next day.
Fig. 7.8 (b) Water moves up in the stem
(c) Enlarged view of open end of stem(b) (c)
Reprint 2024-25

TRANSPORTATION  IN ANIMALS  AND PLANTS 79
What you have learnt
In most animals the blood that circulates in the body distributes food
and oxygen to different cells of the body. It also carries waste productsfrom different parts of the body for excretion.
Circulatory system consists of the heart and blood vessels.
In humans, blood flows through arteries and veins and the heart actsas a pumping organ.
Blood consists of plasma, RBC, WBC and platelets. Blood is red due tothe presence of a red pigment, haemoglobin.
The human heart beats about 70–80 times per minute in an adultperson. This is called heart rate.
Arteries carry blood from the heart to all parts of the body.
Veins carry blood from all parts of the body back to the heart.
Removal of waste products from the body is called excretion.Transpiration
In Class VI you learnt that plants
release a lot of water by the process of
transpiration.
 Plants absorb mineral nutrients and
water from the soil. Not all the waterabsorbed is utilised by the plant. The water
evaporates through the stomata presenton the surface of the leaves by the process
of transpiration. The evaporation of waterfrom leaves generates a suction pull (the
same that you produce when you suck
water through a straw) which canpull water to great heights in the
tall trees. Transpiration also cools
the plant.
Keywords
Ammonia
ArteryBloodBlood vesselsCapillaryCirculatory systemDialysisExcretionExcretory systemHaemoglobinHeart beatKidneysPhloemPlasmaPlateletsPulseRed blood cellRoot hairStethoscopeSweatTissueUreaUreterUrethraUric acidUrinary bladderVeinWhite blood cell
Xylem
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 80
Excretory system of humans consists of two kidneys, two ureters, a
urinary bladder, and urethra.
Salts and urea are removed along with water as sweat.
Fish excrete waste substances such as ammonia which directly dissolvein water.
Birds, insects and lizard excrete uric acid in semi-solid form.
Water and mineral nutrients are absorbed by roots from the soil.
Nutrients are transported along with water to the entire plant via thevascular tissue called xylem.
The vascular tissue for the transport of food to the various parts of theplant is phloem.
A lot of water is lost by plants in the form of vapour through stomataduring transpiration.
Transpiration generates a force which pulls up water absorbed by the
roots from the soil, to reach the stem and leaves.
Exercises
1. Match structures given in Column I with functions given in Column II.
Column  I Column  II
(i) Stomata (a) Absorption of water
(ii)Xylem (b) Transpiration
(iii) Root hairs (c) Transport of food
(iv) Phloem (d) Transport of water
(e) Synthesis of carbohydrates
2. Fill in the blanks.
(i) The blood from the heart is transported to all parts of the body by
the                         .
(ii) Haemoglobin is present in                         cells.
(iii) Arteries and veins are joined by a network of                         .
(iv) The rhythmic expansion and contraction of the heart is called
                        .
(v) The main excretory product in human beings is                         .
(vi) Sweat contains water and                         .
(vii) Kidneys eliminate the waste materials in the liquid form called
                       .
(viii) Water reaches great heights in the trees because of suction pull
caused by                        .
Reprint 2024-25

TRANSPORTATION  IN ANIMALS  AND PLANTS 813. Choose the correct option:
(a) In plants, water is transported through
(i) xylem (ii)phloem
(iii) stomata (iv) root hair
(b) Water absorption through roots can be increased by keeping the
plants
(i) in the shade
(ii) in dim light
(iii) under the fan
(iv) covered with a polythene bag
4. Why is transport of materials necessary in a plant or in an animal?
Explain.
5. What will happen if there are no platelets in the blood?6. What are stomata? Give two functions of stomata.
7. Does transpiration serve any useful function in the plants? Explain.
8. What are the components of blood?9. Why is blood needed by all the parts of a body?
10. What makes the blood look red?11. Describe the function of the heart.
12. Why is it necessary to excrete waste products?
13. Draw a diagram of the human excretory system and label the various
parts.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Find out about blood groups and their importance.
2. When a person suffers from chest pain, the doctor immediately takes
an ECG. Visit a doctor and get information about ECG. You may even
look up an encyclopaedia or the internet.
Did you know?
There is no substitute for blood. If people lose blood from surgery or injuryor if their bodies cannot produce enough blood, there is only one way toget it — through transfusion of blood donated by volunteers. Blood isusually in short supply. Donating blood does not decrease the strength ofthe donors.
Reprint 2024-25

