Nutrition in Plants1
In Class VI you learnt that food is
essential for all living organisms.You also learnt that carbohydrates,
proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals arecomponents of food. These componentsof food are called nutrients  and are
necessary for our body.
All living organisms require food.
Plants can synthesise food for
themselves  but animals including
humans cannot. They get it from plantsor animals that eat plants. Thus,
humans and animals are directly or
indirectly dependent on plants.
1.1 M ODE OF NUTRITION  IN PLANTS
Plants are the only organisms that canprepare food for themselves by using
water, carbon dioxide and minerals. The
raw materials are present in theirsurroundings.
The nutrients enable living
organisms to build their bodies, to grow,to repair damaged parts of their bodies
and provide the energy to carry out life
processes. Nutrition  is the mode of
taking food by an organism and itsutilisation by the body. The mode ofnutrition in which organisms make food
themselves from simple substances is
called autotrophic (auto = self; trophos
= nourishment) nutrition. Therefore,
plants are called autotrophs. Animals
and most other organisms take in food
prepared by plants. They are called
heterotrophs ( heteros = other).
Boojho wants to know
how plants prepare
their own food.
Now we may ask where the food
factories of plants are located: whetherfood is made in all parts of a plant or
only in certain parts? How do plants
obtain the raw materials from thesurroundings? How do they transport
them to the food factories of plants?
1.2 P HOTOSYNTHESIS  — F OOD
MAKING PROCESS  IN PLANTS
Leaves are the food factories of plants.Therefore, all the raw materials must
reach the leaf. Water and minerals
present in the soil are absorbed by the
roots and transported to the leaves.
Carbon dioxide from air is taken in
Paheli wants to know why
our body cannot make food
from carbon dioxide, water
and minerals like plants do.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 2
Paheli wants to know what is so
special about the leaves that they
can synthesise food but  other
parts of the plant cannot.Cells
through the tiny pores present on the
surface of leaves. These pores aresurrounded by ‘guard cells’. Such pores
are called stomata [Fig. 1.2 (c)].
Water and minerals are transported
to the leaves by the vessels which run
like pipes throughout the root, the stem,the branches and the leaves. They form
a continuous path or passage for the
nutrients to reach the leaf. They arecalled vessels. You will learn more about
transport of materials in plants in
Chapter 7.The leaves have a green pigment
called chlorophyll . It helps leaves to
capture the energy of the sunlight. This
energy is used to synthesise (prepare)
food from carbon dioxide and water.Since the synthesis of food occurs in the
presence of sunlight, it is called
photosynthesis (Photo: light; synthesis  :
to combine). So we find that chlorophyll,
sunlight, carbon dioxide and water are
necessary to carry out the process ofphotosynthesis. It is a unique process
on the earth . The solar energy is
captured by the leaves and stored in the
plant in the form of food. Thus, sun is
the ultimate source of energy for allliving organisms.
Can you imagine life on earth in the
absence of photosynthesis!
In the absence of photosynthesis
there would not be any food. The
survival of almost all living organisms
directly or indirectly depends upon thefood made by the plants. Besides,
oxygen which is essential for the survivalYou have seen that buildings are made of bricks.
Similarly, the bodies of living organisms aremade of tiny units called cells. Cells can be seen
only under the microscope. Some organismsare made of only one cell. The cell is enclosed bya thin outer boundary, called the cell membrane .
Most cells have a distinct, centrally locatedspherical structure called the nucleus (Fig. 1.1).The nucleus is surrounded by a jelly-like
substance called cytoplasm .
Cell membraneCytoplasmNucleus
Fig. 1.1 Cell
Boojho wants to know how water
and minerals absorbed by roots
reach the leaves.
Reprint 2024-25

NUTRITION  IN PLANTS 3Besides leaves, photosynthesis also takes place in other green parts of the
plant — in green stems and green branches. The desert plants have scale- or
spine-like leaves to reduce loss of water by transpiration. These plants have
green stems which carry out photosynthesis.
of all organisms is produced duringphotosynthesis. In the absence ofphotosynthesis, life would be impossible
on the earth.
During photosynthesis, chlorophyll
containing cells of leaves (Fig. 1.2), inthe presence of sunlight, use carbon
dioxide and water to synthesisecarbohydrates (Fig. 1.3). The process
can be represented in an equation:
During the process oxygen is
released. The presence of starch in
leaves indicates the occurrence of
photosynthesis. Starch is also a
carbohydrate.  
sunlight
chlorophyllCarbon dioxide water 
Carbohydrate oxygen
Boojho has observed some
plants with deep red, violet or
brown leaves. He wants to
know whether these leaves
also carry out photosynthesis.
Activity 1.1
Take two potted plants of the same kind.
Keep one in the dark (or in a black box)for 72 hours and the other in sunlight.
Fig. 1.2
(a) LeafGuard cells
(c) StomaStomatal opening(b) Section of a leaf
Fig. 1.3   Diagram showing
photosynthesis
Light energy
Carbon
dioxide
OxygenChlorophyll
in leaf
Water and
minerals
Stoma Guard CellsChlorophyll
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 4Fig. 1.4  Leaves of various colourscarbohydrates are made of carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen. These are usedto synthesise other components of food
such as proteins and fats. But proteins
are nitrogenous substances whichcontain nitrogen. From where do the
plants obtain nitrogen?
Recall that nitrogen is present in
abundance in gaseous form in the air.However, plants cannot absorb nitrogen
in this form. Soil has certain bacteria thatconvert gaseous nitrogen into a usable
form and release it into the soil. These
are absorbed by the plants along withwater. Also, you might have seen farmers
adding fertilisers rich in nitrogen to the
soil. In this way the plants fulfil theirrequirements of nitrogen along with the
other constituents. Plants can then
synthesise proteins and vitamins.
1.3 O THER MODES OF NUTRITION  IN
PLANTS
There are some plants which do not havechlorophyll. They cannot synthesisefood. How do they survive and from
where do they derive nutrition? Like
humans and animals such plantsdepend on the food produced by other
plants. They use the heterotrophic
mode of nutrition. Look at Fig. 1.5. Do
you see a yellow wiry branched structure
twining around the stem and branches
of a tree? This is a plant called Cuscuta(Amarbel). It does not have chlorophyll.
It takes readymade food from the plant
on which it is climbing. The plant onwhich it climbs is called the host. Since
it deprives the host of valuable nutrients,You often see slimy, green patches
in ponds or stagnant water bodies. Theseare generally formed by the growth oforganisms called algae. Can you guess
why algae are green in colour? They
contain chlorophyll which gives themthe green colour. Algae can also prepare
their own food by photosynthesis.
Synthesis of plant food other
than carbohydrates
You have just learnt that plants
synthesise carbohydrates through theprocess of photosynthesis. The
Perform iodine test with the leaves ofboth the plants as you did in Class VI.Record your results. Now leave the pot
which was earlier kept in the dark, in
the sunlight for 3 – 4 days and performthe iodine test again on its leaves.
Record your observations in your
notebook.
The leaves other than green also have
chlorophyll. The large amount of red,brown and other pigments mask thegreen colour (Fig. 1.4). Photosynthesis
takes place in these leaves also.
Reprint 2024-25

NUTRITION  IN PLANTS 5Cuscuta is called the parasite . Are we
and other animals also a kind of
parasites? You should think about it
and discuss with your teacher.hair which are directed downwards.When an insect lands in the pitcher, thelid closes and the trapped insect gets
entangled into the hair. The lid closes
and the insect is trapped. The insect isdigested by the digestive juices secreted
in the pitcher and its nutrients are
absorbed. Such insect-eating plants arecalled insectivorous plants.
Is it possible that such plants do not
get all the required nutrients from thesoil in which they grow?
Fig. 1.5  Cuscuta (Amarbel) on host plant
Paheli wants to know whether
mosquitoes, bed bugs, lice and
leeches that suck our blood are
also parasites.
Fig. 1.6  Pitcher plant showing lid and pitcherLeaf modified
into pitcherLid
Boojho is confused. If the
pitcher plant is green and
carries out photosynthesis, then
why does it feed on insects?
Have you seen or heard of plants that
can eat animals? There are a few plants
which can trap insects and digest them.Is it not amazing? Such plants may be
green or of some other colour. Look at
the plant in Fig. 1.6. The pitcher-like orjug-like structure is the modified part
of leaf. The apex of the leaf forms a lid
which can open and close the mouth ofthe pitcher. Inside the pitcher there are1.4 S APROTROPHS
You might have seen packets of
mushrooms sold in the vegetable
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 6
market. You may have also seen fluffy
umbrella-like patches growing in moistsoils or on rotting wood during the rainy
season (Fig. 1.7). Let us find out what
type of nutrients they need to surviveand from where they get them.
Boojho wants to know how
these organisms acquire
nutrients. They do not have
mouths like animals do. They are
not like green plants as they lack
chlorophyll and cannot make food
by photosynthesis.
Activity 1.2
Take a piece of bread and moisten it with
water. Leave it in a moist warm place
for 2–3 days or until fluffy patchesappear on them (Fig. 1.8). What is the
colour of these patches? Observe the
patches under a microscope or amagnifying glass. Write down your
observations in the notebook. You will
see cotton-like threads spread on thepiece of bread.
Paheli is keen to know
whether her beautiful shoes,
which she wore on special
occasions, were spoiled by fungi
during the rainy season. She
wants to know how fungi appear
suddenly during the rainy
season.
These organisms are called fungi .
They have a different mode of nutrition.They absorb the nutrients from thebread. This mode of nutrition in which
organisms take in nutrients from dead
and decaying matter is calledsaprotrophic nutrition . Such organisms
with saprotrophic mode of nutrition arecalled saprotrophs .
Fungi also grow on pickles, leather,
clothes and other articles that are leftin hot and humid weather for long time.During the rainy season they spoil many
things. Ask your parents about the
menace of fungi in your house.
The fungal spores are generally
present  in the air. When they land onFig. 1.8  Fungi
growing on bread
Fig. 1.7  Packet of mushrooms, a mushroom
growing on decayed material
Reprint 2024-25

NUTRITION  IN PLANTS 71.5 H OW NUTRIENTS  ARE
REPLENISHED  IN THE SOIL
Have you seen farmers spreading
manure or fertilisers in the fields, or
gardeners using them in lawns or in
pots? Do you know why this is done?
You learnt that plants absorb
minerals and nutrients from the soil.So, their amounts in the soil keep ondeclining. Fertilisers and manures
contain nutrients such as nitrogen,
potassium, phosphorous, etc. Thesenutrients need to be added from time
to time to enrich the soil. We can grow
plants and keep them healthy ifwe can fulfil the nutrient requirement
of plants.
Usually crop plants absorb a lot of
nitrogen and the soil becomes deficientin nitrogen. You learnt that though
nitrogen gas is available in plenty in theair, plants cannot use it in the manner
they can use carbon dioxide. They need
nitrogen in a soluble form. Thebacterium called Rhizobium  can take
atmospheric nitrogen and convert it intoa usable form. But Rhizobium cannot
make its own food. So it often lives in
the roots of gram, peas, moong,  beans
and other legumes and provides them
with nitrogen. In return, the plants
provide food and shelter to the
bacteria. They, thus, have asymbiotic relationship. This association
is of great significance for the
farmers. They can reduce the use ofnitrogenous fertiliser where leguminous
Boojho says once his
grandfather told him that his
wheat fields were spoiled by a
fungus. He wants to know if
fungi cause diseases also.
Paheli told him that many fungi
like yeast and mushrooms are
useful, but some fungi
cause diseases in plants,
animals including
humans. Some
fungi are also
used as medicines.
wet and warm things they germinate and
grow. Now, can you figure out how we
can protect our things from gettingspoiled?
Some organisms live together and
share both shelter and nutrients. Thisrelationship is called symbiosis . For
example, certain fungi live inside theroots of plants. The plants providenutrients to the fungus and, in return,
the fungus provides water and certain
nutrients.
In organisms called lichens , a
chlorophyll-containing partner, which isan alga, and a fungus live together. Thefungus provides shelter, water and
minerals to the alga and, in return, the
alga prepares and provides food to thefungus.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 8
What you have learnt
All organisms need food and utilise it to get energy for growth and
maintenance of their body.
Green plants synthesise food for themselves by the process of
photosynthesis. They are autotrophs.
Plants like Cuscuta are parasites. They take food from the host plant.
Plants use simple chemical substances like carbon dioxide, water and
minerals for the synthesis of food.
Chlorophyll, water, carbon dioxide and sunlight are the essentialrequirements for photosynthesis.
Complex chemical substances such as carbohydrates are the productsof photosynthesis.
Solar energy is absorbed by the chlorophylls present in leaves/plants.
Oxygen is produced during photosynthesis.
Oxygen released in photosynthesis is utilised by living organisms fortheir survival.
Many fungi derive nutrition from dead and decaying matter. They are
saprotrophs.
A few plants and all animals are dependent on others for their nutrition
and are called heterotrophs.plants are grown. Most of the pulses (dals)
are obtained from leguminous plants.
In this chapter you learnt that
most of the plants are autotrophs.
Only a few plants are parasitic orsaprotrophic. They derive nutritionfrom other organisms. All animals  arecategorised as heterotrophs sincethey depend on plants and other
animals for food. Can we say that
the insectivorous plants are partialheterotrophs ?
Keywords
Autotrophic
ChlorophyllHeterotrophs
HostInsectivorous
NutrientNutrition
ParasitePhotosynthesisSaprotrophs
SaprotrophicStomata
Reprint 2024-25

NUTRITION  IN PLANTS 9Exercise
1. Why do organisms take food?
2. Distinguish between a parasite and a saprotroph.3. How would you test the presence of starch in leaves?4. Give a brief description of the process of synthesis of food in green plants.5. Show with the help of a sketch that plants are the ultimate source of
food.
6. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Green plants are called _________________ since they synthesise
their own food.
(b) The food synthesised by plants is stored as _________________.
(c) In photosynthesis solar energy is absorbed by the pigment called
___________.
(d) During photosynthesis plants take in ______________________ and
release __________________ gas.
7. Name the following:
(i) A parasitic plant with yellow, slender and branched stem.
(ii) A plant that is partially autotrophic.
(iii) The pores through which leaves exchange gases.
8. Tick the correct answer:
(a) Cuscuta is an example of:
(i) autotroph (ii) parasite (iii) saprotroph (iv) host
(b) The plant which traps and feeds on insects is:
(i) Cuscuta  (ii) china rose (iv) pitcher plant (iv) rose
9. Match the items given in Column I with those in Column II:
Column I Column II
Chlorophyll Rhizobium
Nitrogen Heterotrophs
Cuscuta Pitcher plant
Animals Leaf
Insects Parasite
10. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
(i) Carbon dioxide is released during photosynthesis. (T/F)
(ii) Plants which synthesise their food are called saprotrophs. (T/F)
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 10(iii) The product of photosynthesis is not a protein. (T/F)
(iv) Solar energy is converted into chemical energy during
photosynthesis. (T/F)
11. Choose the correct option from the following:
Which part of the plant takes in carbon dioxide from the air forphotosynthesis?
(i) Root hair (ii) Stomata (iii) Leaf veins (iv) Petals
12. Choose the correct option from the following:
Plants take carbon dioxide from the atmosphere mainly through their:(i) roots (ii) stem (iii) flowers (iv) leaves
13. Why do farmers grow many fruits and vegetable crops inside large green
houses? What are the advantages to the farmers?
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Project
Take a potted plant with broad
leaves. Take two strips of blackpaper and cut out a small squarein the centres. Cover a part of twoleaves with these papers and securethem with paper clips (Fig. 1.9).Keep the plant in sunlight for 2–5days. Observe the difference in thecolour of the covered and theuncovered portions on the leaf.Perform iodine test on this leaf. Didthe two parts show differentresults? Now take second leaf.Remove the strip and expose the covered part to the sunlight for 2–3days and do the iodine test again. Describe your observations.
2. Visit a green house if there is one near your place. Observe how they
grow plants. Find out how they regulate the amount of light, water andcarbon dioxide to grow the plants.
3. Try growing a sweet potato just in water. Describe your experiment and
observations.You can read more on the following website:www.phschool.com/science/biology_place/biocoach/photosynth/overview.htmFig. 1.9  Experiment to test the
occurrence of photosynthesis
Did you know?
Light is so important to plants that their leaves grow in many patterns soas to absorb maximum sunlight.
Reprint 2024-25

