Reproduction in Plants8
To produce its kind is a
characteristic of all living
organisms. You have already
learnt this in Class VI. The production
of new individuals from their parents is
known as reproduction. But, how do
plants reproduce? There are different
modes of reproduction in plants which
we shall learn in this chapter.
8.1 M ODES OF REPRODUCTION
In Class VI you learnt about different
parts of a flowering plant. Try to list thevarious parts of a plant and write the
functions of each. Most plants have
roots, stems and leaves. These are calledthe vegetative parts  of a plant. After a
certain period of growth, most plantsbear flowers. You may have seen themango trees flowering in spring. It is
these flowers that give rise to juicy
mango fruit we enjoy in summer. We eat
the fruits and usually discard the seeds.
Seeds germinate and form new plants.
So, what is the function of flowers in
plants? Flowers perform the function of
reproduction in plants. Flowers are the
reproductive parts .
There are several ways by which
plants produce their offspring. These are
categorised into two types: (i) asexual,
and (ii) sexual reproduction. In asexual
reproduction  plants can give rise to new
plants without seeds, whereas in sexualAsexual reproduction
In asexual reproduction new plants are
obtained without production of seeds.
Vegetative propagation
It is a type of asexual reproduction in
which new plants are produced fromroots, stems, leaves and buds. Since
reproduction is through the vegetative
parts of the plant, it is known asvegetative propagation.
Activity 8.1
Cut a branch of rose or champa with a
node. This piece of branch is termed a
cutting. Bury the cutting in the soil. Anode is a part of the stem/branch at
which a leaf arises (Fig. 8.1). Water the
cutting every day and observe itsgrowth. Observe and record the number
of days taken for roots to come out and
Paheli thought that new
plants always grow from seeds.
But, she has never seen the seeds
of sugarcane, potato and rose. She
wants to know how these plants
reproduce.
reproduction, new plants are obtained
from seeds.
Reprint 2024-25

REPRODUCTION  IN PLANTS 83
new leaves to arise. Try the same activity
by growing money plant in a jar of waterand record your observations.
Likewise you can also grow ginger
(Fig. 8.3) or turmeric.
Bryophyllum  (sprout leaf plant) has
buds in the margins of leaves (Fig. 8.4).If a leaf of this plant falls on a moist
You must have seen flower buds
developing into flowers. Apart fromflower buds, there are buds in the axil(point of attachment of the leaf at the
node) of leaves which develop into
shoots. These buds are called vegetativebuds (Fig. 8.2). A bud consists of a short
stem around which immature
overlapping leaves are present. Vegetative
buds can also give rise to new plants.
Activity 8.2
Take a fresh potato. Observe the scars
on it with the help of a magnifying glass.
You may find bud(s) in them. These scarsare also called “eyes” . Cut the potato
into small portions, each with an eyeand bury them in the soil. Water thepieces regularly for a few days and
observe their progress. What do you find?Fig. 8.1  Stem-cutting of roseFig. 8.2  Potato plant sprouting from an ‘eye’
Fig. 8.3  Ginger with new plants sprouting
from it
soil, each bud can give rise to a newplant.
Roots of some plants can also give
rise to new plants. Sweet potato anddahlia are examples.
Plants such as cacti produce new
plants when their parts get detachedNode
Bud in
the axil
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 84Activity 8.3
(To be demonstrated by the teacher)
Take a piece of yeast cake or yeast
powder  from a bakery or a chemist shop.
Take a pinch of yeast and place it in acontainer with some water. Add a
spoonful of sugar and shake to dissolve
it. Keep it in the warm part of a room.After an hour, put a drop of this liquid
on a glass slide and observe under a
microscope. What do you observe? Youmay see the formation of new yeast cells
(Fig. 8.5).from the main plant body. Each
detached part can grow into a new
plant.Fig. 8.4  Leaf of Bryophyllum with buds in the
margin
Boojho wants to know if
there is any advantage of
vegetative propagation.
Plants produced by vegetative
propagation take less time to grow andbear flowers and fruits earlier than those
produced from seeds. The new plantsare exact copies of the parent plant, as
they are produced from a single parent.
Later in this chapter you will learn
that plants produced by sexualreproduction have characters of both the
parents. Plants produce seeds as a resultof sexual reproduction.
Budding
You have already learnt about the tiny
organisms like yeast can be seen only
under a microscope. These grow andmultiply every few hours if sufficient
nutrients are made available to them.
Remember that yeast is a single-celledorganism. Let us see how they
reproduce?The small bulb-like projection
coming out from the yeast cell is calleda bud. The bud gradually grows and
gets detached from the parent cell and
forms a new yeast cell. The new yeast
cell grows, matures and produces more
yeast cells. Sometimes, another  budarises from the bud forming a chain of
buds. If this process continues, a large
number of yeast cells are produced in ashort time.
Fragmentation
You might have seen slimy green
patches in ponds, or in other stagnant
water bodies. These are the algae. When
Fig. 8.5  Reproduction in yeast by buddingYeast cellDeveloping budChain of buds
New budNew plants
Reprint 2024-25

REPRODUCTION  IN PLANTS 85
air. As they are very light they can cover
long distances.
Spores are asexual reproductive
bodies. Each spore is covered by ahard protective coat to withstandunfavourable conditions such as high
temperature and low humidity. So
they can survive for a long time. Underfavourable conditions, a spore
germinates and develops into a new
individual. Plants such as moss andferns (Fig. 8.8) also reproduce by means
of spores.
12.2 S EXUAL REPRODUCTION
You have learnt earlier the structure ofa flower. You know that the flowers are
the reproductive parts of a plant.Stamens  are the male reproductive part
and pistil  is the female reproductive part
(Fig. 8.9).water and nutrients are available algaegrow and multiply rapidly byfragmentation. An alga breaks up into
two or more fragments. These fragments
or pieces grow into new individuals(Fig. 8.6). This process continues and
they cover a large area in a short period
of time.
Fig. 8.7  Reproduction through spore formation
in fungusSpore formation
In Chapter 1 you learnt that the fungi
on a bread piece grow from spores which
are present in the air. Repeat Activity1.2. Observe the spores in the cotton-
like mesh on the bread. When spores
are released they keep floating in theFig. 8.8  Reproduction through spore formation
in fern
HyphaSporangium
SporesSori
(Spore formingbodies)
Fig. 8.6  Fragmentation in spirogyra (an alga)
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 86
Boojho wants to know how the
male gamete in the pollen grain
reaches the female gamete present
in the ovule.
Pollination
Generally, pollen grains have a tough
protective coat which prevents them
from drying up. Since pollen grains are
light, they can be carried by wind orActivity 8.4
Take a mustard/China rose/petuniaflower and separate its reproductive
parts. Study the various parts of a
stamen and pistil.
Flowers which contain either only
pistil or only stamens are calledunisexual  flowers . Flowers which
contain both stamens and pistil are
called bisexual flowers . Corn, papaya
and cucumber produce unisexual
flowers, whereas mustard, rose and
petunia have bisexual flowers. Both
Fig. 8.10 Pollination in flower Fig. 8.9  Reproductive parts
(b) PistilStigma
Style
Ovary
Anther
Filament
(a) Stamen
Ovule
(a) Self-pollination (b)  Cross-pollinationAntherStigmaStigma
male and female unisexual flowers may
be present in the same plant or indifferent plants.
Could you identify the anther and
the filament of a stamen? [Fig. 8.9 (a)].Anther contains pollen grains which
produce male gametes . A pistil consists
of stigma, style and ovary. Ovary
contains one or more ovules. The
female gamete or the  egg is formed in
an ovule [Fig. 8.9 (b)]. In sexual
reproduction a male and a female
gamete fuse to form a zygote .
Pollens
Reprint 2024-25

REPRODUCTION  IN PLANTS 87water. Insects visit flowers and carry
away pollen on their bodies. Some of
the pollen lands on the stigma of a flowerof the same kind. The transfer of pollen
from the anther to the stigma of a flower
is called pollination .  If the pollen lands
on the stigma of the same flower or
another flower of the same plant, it is
called self-pollination. When the pollenof a flower lands on the stigma of a flower
of a different plant of the same kind, it
is called cross-pollination  [Fig. 8.10 (a)
and (b)].
Fertilisation
The cell which results after fusion of
the gametes is called a zygote . The
process of fusion of male and female
Boojho wants to know why
flowers are generally so colourful
and fragrant. Is it to attract
insects?
Fig. 8.12  (a) Section of an apple, (b) Almond
gametes (to form a zygote) is calledfertilisation (Fig. 8.11). The zygote
develops into an embryo.
8.3 F RUITS AND SEED FORMATION
After fertilisation, the ovary grows intoa fruit and other parts of the flower fall
off. The fruit is the ripened ovary. The
seeds develop from the ovules. The seedcontains an embryo enclosed in a
protective seed coat.
Some fruits are fleshy and juicy such
as mango and orange. Some fruits arehard like almonds and walnuts
[Fig. 8.12 (a) and (b)].
8.4 S EED DISPERSAL
In nature same kind of plants grow atdifferent places. This happens because
seeds are dispersed to different places .
Sometimes after a walk through a forest
or a field or a park, you may have found
seeds or fruits sticking to your clothes.Fig. 8.11  Fertilisation (Zygote formation)
Pollen grain (germinating)
OvumZygote
formation
Pollen tube
(a)(b)(a)
(b)
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 88Did you try to observe how these seeds
were clinging to your clothes?
What do you think will happen if all
seeds of a plant were to fall at the sameplace and grow there? There would besevere competition for sunlight, water,
minerals and space. As a result the seeds
would not grow into healthy plants.Plants benefit by seed dispersal. It
prevents competition between the plant
and its own seedlings for sunlight, waterand minerals. It also enables the plants
to invade new habitats for wider
distribution.
Seeds and fruits of plants are carried
away by wind, water and animals.Winged seeds such as those of drumstickand maple [Fig. 8.13 (a) and (b)], lightseeds of grasses or hairy seeds of aak(Madar ) and hairy fruit of sunflower
[Fig. 8.14 (a), (b)], get blown off with the
wind to far away places. Some seeds are
dispersed by water. These fruits or seedsusually develop floating ability in the
form of spongy or fibrous outer coat as
in coconut. Some seeds are dispersed byanimals, especially spiny seeds with
hooks which get attached to the bodies
of animals and are carried to distantplaces. Examples are Xanthium
(Fig. 8.15) and Urena .
Some seeds are dispersed when the
fruits burst with sudden jerks. The seeds
are scattered far from the parent plant.
This happens in the case of castor andbalsam.
Fig. 8.13  Seeds of (a) drumstick and
(b) maple
Fig. 8.15  XanthiumFig. 8.14  (a) The hairy fruit of sunflower and
(b) hairy seed of madar (aak)
Seed
Wing
(a) (b) (a) (b)
Reprint 2024-25

REPRODUCTION  IN PLANTS 89
What you have learnt
All organisms multiply or reproduce their own kind.
In plants there are two modes of reproduction, asexual and sexual.
There are several methods of asexual reproduction such as
fragmentation, budding, spore formation and vegetative propagation.
Sexual reproduction involves the fusion of male and female gametes.
In vegetative propagation new plants are produced from differentvegetative parts such as leaves, stems and roots.
Flower is the reproductive part of a plant.
A flower may be unisexual with either the male or the female reproductiveparts.
A bisexual flower has both the male and the female reproductive parts.
The male gametes are found inside the pollen grains and female gametesare found in the ovule.
Pollination is the process of transfer of pollen grains from the anther ofone flower to the stigma of the same or another flower.
Pollination is of two types, self-pollination and cross-pollination. Inself-pollination, pollen grains are transferred from the anther to thestigma of the same flower. In cross-pollination, pollen grains aretransferred from the anther of one flower to the stigma of another flowerof the same kind.
Pollination takes place in plants with the help of wind, water and insects.
The fusion of male and female gametes is called fertilisation.
Fertilised egg is called zygote. Zygote develops into an embryo.
Fruit is the mature ovary whereas ovule develops into a seed, whichcontains the developing embryo.
Seed dispersal is aided by wind, water and animals.
Seed dispersal helps the plants to (i) prevent overcrowding, (ii) avoidcompetition for sunlight, water and minerals and (iii) invade new habitats.Keywords
Asexual reproduction
BuddingEmbryoFertilisationFragmentationGametesHyphaOvulePollen grainPollen tubePollinationSeed dispersalSexual reproductionSporeSporangiumVegetative propagationZygote
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 90Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Production of new individuals from the vegetative part of parent is
called_____________.
(b) A flower may have either male or female reproductive parts. Such
a flower is called_____________.
(c) The transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the
same or of another flower of the same kind is known as
_____________.
(d) The fusion of male and female gametes is termed as _____________.
(e) Seed dispersal takes place by means of _____________,
_____________ and _____________.
2. Describe the different methods of asexual reproduction. Give examples.
3. Explain what you understand by sexual reproduction.4. State the main difference between asexual and sexual reproduction.5. Sketch the reproductive parts of a flower.6. Explain the difference between self-pollination and cross-pollination.7. How does the process of fertilisation take place in flowers?8. Describe the various ways by which seeds are dispersed.9. Match items in Column I with those in Column II:
Column I Column II
(a) Bud (i) Maple(b) Eyes (ii) Spirogyra
(c) Fragmentation (iii) Yeast
(d) Wings (iv) Bread mould
(e) Spores (v) Potato
(vi) Rose
10. Tick ( ) the correct answer:
(a) The reproductive part of a plant is the
(i) leaf (ii) stem  (iii) root (iv) flower
(b) The process of fusion of the male and the female gametes is called
(i) fertilisation (ii) pollination
(iii) reproduction (iv) seed formation
Reprint 2024-25

REPRODUCTION  IN PLANTS 91S. No. Name of fruit- Agent through  which Part of or seed which
bearing plant seeds are dispersed helps in dispersal
1.
2.
3.(c) Mature ovary forms the
(i) seed (ii) stamen
(iii) pistil (iv) fruit
(d) A spore producing organism is
(i) rose (ii) bread mould
(iii) potato (iv) ginger
(e) Bryophyllum  can reproduce by its
(i) stem (ii) leaves
(iii) roots (iv) flower
Extended Learning—Activities and Projects
1. Make your own cactus garden by collecting pieces cut from different
kinds of cacti. Grow the variety in one single flat container or in
separate pots.
2. Visit a fruit market and collect as many local fruits as possible. If many
fruits are not available, you can collect tomatoes and cucumbers (theseare fruits, though we use them as vegetables). Make drawings of thedifferent fruits. Split the fruits and examine the seeds within. Look forany special characteristics in the fruits and their seeds.
You can visit a library also to learn about this.
3. Think of ten different fruit-bearing plants. Remember that many
vegetables are also fruits of the plants. Discuss with your teacher,
parents, farmers, fruit growers and agricultural experts (if availablenearby) and find out the manner of their dispersal. Present your datain the form of a table as shown below:
4. Suppose there is one member of a particular kind of organism in a
culture dish, which doubles itself in one hour through asexualreproduction. Work out the number of members of that kind of organismwhich will be present in the culture dish after ten hours. Such a colonyof individuals arising from one parent is called a “clone”.
Reprint 2024-25

