SCIENCE 156Wastewater Story13
All of us use water in our homes and
make it dirty.
Dirty! Are you surprised?Rich in lather, mixed with oil, black–
brown water that goes down the drains
from sinks, showers, toilets, laundries
is dirty. It is called wastewater . This
used water should not be wasted. We
must clean it up by removing pollutants.
Have you ever thought where thewastewater goes and what happens to it?
13.1 W ATER, OUR LIFELINE
Clean water is a basic need of human
being. Let us make a mindmap of the
many uses of clean water.
Activity 13.1
(We have given one example of the
use of clean water. You can add many
more.)Clean water that is fit
for use is unfortunatelynot available to all. It has
been reported that morethan one billion of people
have no access to safe
drinking water. This accounts for a largenumber of water-related diseases and
even deaths. People even children walk
for several kilometres to collect cleanwater. Is it not a serious matter for
human dignity?
The increasing scarcity of fresh-water
due to population growth, pollution,industrial development,mismanagement
and other factors. Realising the urgencyof the situation on the World Water Day,
on 22 March 2005, the General
Assembly of the United Nationsproclaimed the period 2005–2015 as the
International Decade for action on
“Water for life”.  All efforts made during
this decade aim to reduce by half the
number of people who do not have
access to safe drinking water.
There has been perceptible progress
in the direction of the aim but still thereis a lot to achieve.
Cleaning of water  is a process of
removing pollutants before it enters awater body or is reused. This process ofwastewater treatment is commonly
Clean water
put to use
Drinking
Reprint 2024-25

WASTEWATER  STORY 157known as “Sewage Treatment” . It takes
place in several stages.
13.2 W HAT IS SEWAGE ?
Sewage is wastewater released by homes,
industries, hospitals, offices and otherusers. It also includes rainwater that has
run down the street during a storm or
heavy rain. The water that washes offroads and rooftops carries harmful
substances with it. Sewage is a liquid
waste. Most of it is water, which hasdissolved and suspended impurities.
Activity 13.2
Locate an open drain near your home,
school or on the roadside and inspect
water flowing through it.
Record colour, odour and any other
observation. Discuss with your friends
and your teacher and fill up the
following Table 13.1.
We know that sewage is a complex
mixture containing suspended solids,
organic and inorganic impurities,
nutrients, saprophytes and disease
causing bacteria and other microbes.
These include the following.
Organic impurities    –Human faeces,
animal waste,oil, urea (urine),
pesticides,
herbicides, fruit
and vegetable
waste, etc.
Inorganic impurities – Nitrates,
Phosphates,metals.
Nutrients                  – Phosphorus
and Nitrogen.
Bacteria                    – Such as vibrio
cholera which
causes cholera
and salmonellaparatyphi which
causes typhoid.
Other microbes         – Such as
protozones
which cause
dysentery.
13.3 W ATER FRESHENS  UP — A N
EVENTFUL  JOURNEY
In a home or a public building generally
one set of pipes brings clean water and
another set of pipes takes away
wastewater. Imagine that we could seethrough the ground. We would see a
network of big and small pipes, called
Table 13.1 Contaminant survey
S. No. Type of sewage Point of origin Contaminants Any other
remark
1. Sullage water Kitchen
2. Foul waste Toilets
3. Trade waste Industrial
and commercial
organisations
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 158sewers, forming the sewerage . It is like
a transport system that carries sewage
from the point of being produced to the
point of disposal, i.e. treatment plant.
Manholes are located at every 50 m
to 60 m in the sewerage, at the junctionof two or more sewers and at points
where there is a change in direction.
Activity 13.3
Study the sewage route in your home/school/building. Do the following:
Make a line diagram of the sewage
route.
Walk down the street or survey the
campus to find the number of
manholes.
If possible, observe open drain and
record which living organisms are
found in and around it.In case you do not have a sewerage
system in your locality, find out howsewage is being disposed off.
Treatment of polluted water
Perform the following activity. It will helpyou understand the processes that take
place at the wastewater treatment plant.
Activity 13.4
Divide yourself into groups to perform
the activity. Record observations at eachstage:
Fill a large glass jar 3/4 full of water.
Add some dirty organic matter suchas grass pieces or orange peels, a
small amount of detergent, and a few
drops of an ink or any colour.Cap the jar, shake it well and let the
mixture stand in the sun for twodays.
After two days, shake the mixture
and pour a small sample into testtube. Label this test tube “Before
treatment; Sample 1”. How does itsmell?
Use an aerator from an aquarium tobubble air through the sample in theglass jar. Allow several hours foraeration; leave the aerator attachedovernight. If you do not have anaerator, use a mechanical stirrer or
a mixer. You may have to stir it
several times.
The next day when aeration iscomplete, pour another sample intoa second test tube. Label it as “After
aeration; Sample 2”.
Fold a piece of filter paper to form acone. Wet the paper with tap waterand then insert the cone in a funnel.Mount the funnel on a support(as you have learnt in Class VI).
Place layers of sand, fine gravel and
finally medium gravel in the funnel
(Fig. 13.2). (An actual filtration plantdoes not use filter paper, but the sandfilter is several metres deep).
Pour the remaining aerated liquidthrough the filter into the beakers.
Do not allow the liquid to spill over
the filter. If the filtered liquid is notclear, filter it a few  times till you getclear water.
Pour a sample of the filtered waterinto a third test tube labelled
“Filtered; Sample 3”.
Reprint 2024-25

WASTEWATER  STORY 159Pour another sample of the filtered
water into a fourth test tube. Add a
small piece of a chlorine tablet. Mixwell until the water is clear. Label the
test tube “Chlorinated; Sample 4” .
Observe carefully the samples in all
the test tubes. Do not taste ! Just
smell them!Now answer the following questions:
(a) What changes did you observe in the
appearance of the liquid afteraeration?
(b) Did aeration change the odour?
(c
) What was removed by the sand filter?
(d) Did chlorine remove the colour?
(e) Did chlorine have an odour? Was it
worse than that of the wastewater?
13.4 W ASTE WATER  TREATMENT  PLANT
(WWTP)
Treatment of wastewater involves
physical, chemical, and biological
processes, which remove physical,chemical and biological matter that
contaminates the wastewater.1. Wastewater is passed through bar
screens. Large objects like rags,
sticks, cans, plastic packets, napkins
are removed (Fig. 13.3).
Fig. 13.2  Filtration process
Fig. 13.3  Bar screen
Fig. 13.4  Grit and sand removal tank2. Water then goes to a grit and sand
removal tank. The speed of theincoming wastewater is decreased to
allow sand, grit and pebbles to settledown (Fig. 13.4).
3. The water is then allowed to settle in
a large tank which is sloped towardsthe middle. Solids like faeces settleat the bottom and are removed with
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 160After several hours, the suspended
microbes settle at the bottom of the tank
as activated sludge. The water is then
removed from the top.
The activated sludge is about 97%
water. The water is removed by sanddrying beds or machines. Dried sludge
is used as manure, returning organicmatter and nutrients to the soil.
The treated water has a very low level
of organic material and suspendedmatter. It is discharged into a sea, a river
or into the ground. Nature cleans it up
further.  Sometimes it may be necessaryto disinfect water with chemicals like
chlorine and ozone before releasing it
into the distribution system.
Become an active citizen
Waste generation is a natural part ofhuman activity. But we can limit the
a scraper. This is the sludge . A
skimmer removes the floatable solidslike oil and grease. Water so clearedis called clarified water (Fig. 13.5).
The sludge is transferred to a
separate tank where it is decomposed
by the anaerobic bacteria. The biogas
produced in the process can be used as
fuel or can be used to produce electricity.4. Air is pumped into the clarified water
to help aerobic bacteria to grow.Bacteria consume human waste, foodwaste, soaps and other unwanted
matter still remaining in clarified
water (Fig. 13.6).
Fig. 13.6  AeratorDid you know ?
It has been suggested that we should
plant eucalyptus trees all along
sewage ponds. These trees absorb allsurplus wastewater rapidly and
release pure water vapour into the
atmosphere.
The water in a river is cleaned
naturally by processes that are
similar to those adopted in a
wastewater treatment plant.
Fig. 13.5  Water clarifier
Reprint 2024-25

WASTEWATER  STORY 161type of waste and quantity of waste
produced. Often we have been repelledby offensive smell. The sight of open
drains is disgusting. The situation
worsens in the rainy season when thedrains start overflowing. We have to
wade through the mud pools on the
roads. Most unhygienic and unsanitaryconditions prevail. Flies, mosquitoes and
other insects breed in it.
You can be an enlightened citizen
and approach the municipality or thegram panchayat. Insist that the open
drains be covered. If the sewage ofany particular house makes the
neighbourhood dirty, you shouldChemicals like paints, solvents,
insecticides, motor oil, medicinesmay kill microbes that help purify
water. So do not throw them down
the drain.
Used tealeaves, solid food remains,
soft toys, cotton, sanitary towels, etc.
should also be thrown in the dustbin(Fig. 13.7). These wastes choke the
drains. They do not allow free flow
of oxygen. This hampers thedegradation process.
 Don’t add to the load of
WWTP. Paheli wonders how!
request them to be more considerate
about others’ health.
13.5 B ETTER HOUSEKEEPING
PRACTICES
One of the ways to minimise or eliminatewaste and pollutants at their source is
to  see what you are releasing down thedrain.
Cooking oil and fats should not be
thrown down the drain. They canharden and block the pipes. In an
open drain the fats clog the soil pores
reducing its effectiveness in filteringwater. Throw oil and fats in the
dustbin.
Fig. 13.7  Do not throw everything in the sink
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 16213.6 S ANITATION  AND DISEASE
Poor sanitation and contaminated
drinking water is the cause of a large
number of diseases.
Let us look at our own country. A
vast number of our people are still
without sewerage facilities. Where dothey relieve themselves?
A very large fraction of our people
defecates in the open, on dry riverbeds,
on railway tracks, near fields and many
a time directly in water. Untreated
human excreta is a health hazard. It
may cause water pollution and soilpollution. Both the surface water and
groundwater get polluted. Groundwater
is a source of water for wells, tubewells,
springs and many rivers. Thus, it
becomes the most common route forwater borne diseases. They include
cholera, typhoid, polio, meningitis,
hepatitis and dysentery.
Bhoojo wants to know how
sewage is disposed of in an
aeroplane.
13.7 A LTERNATIVE  ARRANGEMENT
FOR SEWAGE  DISPOSAL
To improve sanitation, low cost onsite
sewage disposal systems are being
encouraged. Examples are septic tanks,
chemical toilets, composting pits. Septictanks are suitable for places where there
is no sewerage system, for hospitals,
isolated buildings or a cluster of 4 to 5houses.
Some organisations offer hygienic
on-site human waste disposaltechnology. These toilets do not require
scavenging. Excreta from the toilet seats
flow through covered drains into abiogas plant. The biogas produced is
used as a source of energy.
13.8 S ANITATION  AT PUBLIC PLACES
In our country fairs are organisedperiodically. A large number of people
participate in them. In the same wayrailway stations, bus depots, airports,
hospitals are very busy places.
Thousands of people visit them daily.Large amount of waste is generatedVermi-processing toilet
A design of  a toilet in which humans excreta is treated by earthworms has beentested in India. It has been found to be a novel, low water-use toilet for safe
processing of human waste. The operation of the toilet is very simple and hygienic.
The human excreta is completely converted to vermi cakes — a resource muchneeded for soil.In the year 2016, the Government of India has initiated a new mission known as“Swachh Bharat” under which a lot of drives such as proper sewage disposal
and providing toilets for everyone have been started.
Reprint 2024-25

WASTEWATER  STORY 163
What you have learnt
Used water is wastewater. Wastewater could be reused.
Wastewater is generated in homes, industries, agricultural fields and in
other human activities. This is called sewage.
Sewage is a liquid waste which causes water and soil pollution.
Wastewater is treated in a sewage treatment plant.
Treatment plants reduce pollutants in wastewater to a level where naturecan take care of it.
Where underground sewerage systems and refuse disposal systems arenot available, the low cost on-site sanitation system can be adopted.
By-products of wastewater treatment are sludge and biogas.
Open drain system is a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes and organismswhich cause diseases.
We should not defecate in the open. It is possible to have safe disposal ofexcreta by low cost methods.here. It must be disposed of properly
otherwise epidemics could break out.
The government has laid down
certain standards of sanitation but,unfortunately, they are not strictlyenforced.
However, all of us can contribute in
maintaining sanitation at public places.We should not scatter litter anywhere.
If there is no dustbin in sight, we should
carry the litter home and throw it in thedustbin.
Conclusion
We all have a role to play in keeping ourenvironment clean and healthy. YouMahatma Gandhi said:
“No one need to wait for anyone else
to adopt a humane and enlightened
course of action.”must realise your responsibility inmaintaining the water sources in ahealthy state. Adopting good sanitation
practices should be our way of life. As
an agent of change your individualinitiative will make a great difference.
Influence others with your energy, ideas
and optimism. A lot can be done if peoplework together. There is great power in
collective action.
Keywords
Aeration
Aerobic bacteriaAnaerobic bacteriaBiogasContaminantSanitationSewageSewerSewerageSludgeWastewater
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 164Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Cleaning of water is a process of removing ____________.
(b) Wastewater released by houses is called ____________.
(c) Dried ____________ is used as manure.
(d) Drains get blocked by ____________ and ____________.
2. What is sewage? Explain why it is harmful to discharge untreated
sewage into rivers or seas.
3. Why should oils and fats be not released in the drain? Explain.4. Describe the steps involved in getting clarified water from wastewater.5. What is sludge? Explain how it is treated.6. Untreated human excreta is a health hazard. Explain.7. Name two chemicals used to disinfect water.8. Explain the function of bar screens in a wastewater treatment plant.9. Explain the relationship between sanitation and disease.
10. Outline your role as an active citizen in relation to sanitation.11. Here is a crossword puzzle: Good luck!
Reprint 2024-25

WASTEWATER  STORY 165Across
3. Liquid waste products
4. Solid waste extracted in sewage treatment6. A word related to hygiene8. Waste matter discharged from human body
Down
1. Used water2. A pipe carrying sewage5. Micro-organisms which causes cholera7. A chemical to disinfect water
12. Study the following statements about ozone:
(a) It is essential for breathing of living organisms.(b) It is used to disinfect water.
(c) It absorbs ultraviolet rays.
(d) Its proportion in air is about 3%.
Which of these statements are correct?
(i) (a), (b) and (c)
(ii) (b) and (c)
(iii) (a) and (d)
(iv) All four
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Construct a crossword puzzle of your own using the keywords.2. Then and now: Talk to your grand parents and other elderly people in
the neighbourhood. Find out the sewage disposal systems available to
them. You can also write letters to people living in far off places to getmore information. Prepare a brief report on the information youcollected.
3. Visit a sewage treatment plant.
It could be as exciting and enriching as a visit to a zoo, a museum, or apark. To guide your observation here are a few suggestions.
Record in your notepad:Place ___________ Date  ___________ Time  ___________
Name of the official at the plant __________  Guide/Teacher ___________
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 166(a) The location of the sewage plant.
(b) Treatment capacity.
(c) The purpose of screening as the initial process.
(d) How is air bubbled through the aeration tank?
(e) How safe is the water at the end of the treatment? How is it tested?(f ) Where is the water discharged after treatment?(g) What happens to the plant during heavy rains?
(h) Is biogas consumed within the plant or sold to other consumers?
(i) What happens to the treated sludge?
(j) Is there any special effort to protect nearby houses from the plant?
(k) Other observations.
For more information, consult:
Millennium Development Goals:http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/“Water for Life” International Decade for Action:http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/http://www.cep.unep.org/pubs/Techreports/tr43en/Household%20systems.htm
An early engineering feat: Indus valley civilisation
One of the ancient civilisations, Harappa and Mohenjodaro had perhaps
the world’s first urban sanitation system. Within the city individual
houses, or groups of houses, obtained water from wells. There was aseparate room for bathing, and wastewater was directed to the covered
drains which lined the major streets. The oldest toilet made of bricks is
about 4500 years old.“By providing clean water and sanitation to the poorest people on the planet,
we can reduce poverty and suffering and ensure education for all chil-dren.”— UNICEF
Reprint 2024-25

C KC K
Reprint 2024-25

Notes
Reprint 2024-25

