Acids, Bases and Salts4
We use in our daily life a large
number of substances such
as lemon, tamarind, common
salt, sugar and vinegar. Do they have
the same taste? Let us recall tastes of
some edible substances listed in
Table 4.1. If you have not tasted any ofthese substances taste it now and enter
the result in Table 4.1.You find that some of these
substances taste sour, some taste bitter,some taste sweet and some taste salty.
4.1 A CIDS AND BASES
Curd, lemon juice, orange juice and
vinegar taste sour. These substancestaste sour because they contain acids .
The chemical nature of such substancesis acidic. The word acid comes from the
Latin word acere  which means sour.
The acids in these substances arenatural acids.
What about baking soda? Does it also
taste sour? If not, what is its taste? Since,it does not taste sour it means, that ithas no acids in it. It is bitter in taste. If
you rub it s solution between fingers, it
feels soapy. Generally, substances like
these which are bitter in taste and feel
soapy on touching are known as bases .
The nature of such substances is said to
be basic .
If we cannot taste every substance,
how do we find its nature?
Special type of substances are used
to test whether a substance is acidic orbasic. These substances are known asindicators. The indicators change their
colour when added to a solution
containing an acidic or a basicsubstance. Turmeric, litmus, China rose
petals ( Gudhal ), etc., are some of the
naturally occurring indicators.CAUTION
1. Do not taste anything unless asked
to do so.
2. Do not touch anything unless asked
to do so.
Table 4.1
Substance Taste (sour/bitter/
any other)
Lemon juice
Orange juice
VinegarCurdTamarind ( imli)
SugarCommon salt
Amla
Baking sodaGrapesUnripe mango Cucumber
Reprint 2024-25

ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 39
(b)
Fig. 4.1  (a) Lichens, and (b) Red and blue
litmus paper(a)4.2 N ATURAL  INDICATORS
AROUND  US
Litmus: A natural dye
The most commonly used natural
indicator is litmus. It is extractedfrom lichens  (Fig. 4.1a). It has a
mauve (purple) colour in distilledwater. When added to an acidicsolution, it turns red and when
added to a basic solution, it turns
blue. It is available in the form of asolution, or in the form of strips of
paper, known as litmus paper.
Generally, it is available as red andblue litmus paper (Fig. 4.1b).
Can I taste all substances to
find their taste?
No. Have you not read the
caution? We should not
taste unknown
substances. They could
harm us.
Do you know?
Name of acid Found in
Acetic acid Vinegar
Formic acid Ant’s stingCitric acid Citrus fruits such
as oranges,
lemons, etc.
Lactic acid Curd
Oxalic acid Spinach
Ascorbic acid Amla , Citrus fruits
(Vitamin C)Tartaric acid Tamarind, grapes,
unripe mangoes, etc.
All the acids mentioned
above occur in nature
Name of base Found inCalcium hydroxide Lime water
Ammonium hydroxide Window cleaner
Sodium hydroxide/ SoapPotassium hydroxide
Magnesium hydroxide Milk of magnesia 
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 40Turmeric is another natural
indicator
Activity 4.2
Take a tablespoonful of turmeric
powder. Add a little water and makea paste.
Make turmeric paper by depositingturmeric paste on blotting paper/filterpaper and drying it. Cut thin strips
of the yellow paper obtained.
Put a drop of soap solution on the
strip of turmeric paper.
What do you observe?Activity 4.1
Mix some water with lemon juice in aplastic cup/tumbler/test tube.
Put a drop of the above solution on astrip of the red litmus paper with thehelp of a dropper.
Is there any change in colour?
Repeat the same exercise with the
blue litmus paper.
Note down if there is any change in
colour.
Perform the same activity with the
following substances:
Tap water, detergent solution, aerated
drink, soap solution, shampoo, common
salt solution, sugar solution, vinegar,
baking soda solution, milk of magnesia,washing soda solution, lime water. If
possible make solutions in distilled water.
Record your observations as in
Table. 4.2.
In your Table, are there any
substances on which litmus had no
effect? Name those substances.
The solutions which do not change
the colour of either red or blue litmusare known as neutral solutions. These
substances are neither acidic nor basic.
To prepare limewater, take some water in a tumbler and add some lime ( chuna)
into it. Stir the solution and keep it for some time. Pour a little from the top.
This is lime water.
Fig. 4.2  Children performing litmus test
Table 4.2
S. No. Test solution Effect on red Effect on blue Inference
litmus paper litmus paper
Reprint 2024-25

ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 41Table 4.3
S. No. Test solution Effect on turmeric solution Remarks
1. Lemon juice
2. Orange juice3. Vinegar4. Milk of magnesia5. Baking soda
6. Lime water
7. Sugar
8. Common saltYou can prepare a greeting card for
your mother on her birthday. Apply
turmeric paste on a sheet of plane
white paper and dry it. Draw abeautiful flower with soap solution
with the help of a cotton bud. You will
get a beautiful greeting card.
Similarly test the solutions listed in
Table 4.3 and note down your
observations. You may try solutions of
other substances also.
China Rose as Indicator
Activity 4.3
Collect some China rose ( Gudhal ) petals
and place them in a beaker. Add someFig. 4.3  China rose flower and indicator
prepared from it
Acid Base Indicator
China
rose
Now I understand why a
turmeric stain on my white shirt
is turned to red when it is
washed with soap. It is because
the soap solution is basic.
Turmeric pasteSoap
solution
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 42Table 4.4
S. No. Test solution        Initial colour   Final colour
1. Shampoo (dilute solution)
2. Lemon juice 3. Soda water
4. Sodium hydrogencarbonate solution 
5. Vinegar6. Sugar solution7. Common salt solution
warm water. Keep the mixture for some
time till water becomes coloured. Use
the coloured water as an indicator. Add
five drops of the indicator to each of thesolutions given in Table 4.4.
What is the effect of the indicator on
acidic, basic and neutral solutions?China rose indicator (Fig. 4.3) turns
acidic solutions to dark pink (magenta)
and basic solutions to green.Coffee is brown
And bitter in taste.
Is it an acid?Or a base?
Don’t give the answer
Without any test,You are in the dark
With its taste.Paheli brought the following paheli
(riddle) for you.
I am not getting the same result
when using solid baking soda
on dry litmus paper. Why?
Make a solution of baking
soda and then try.
Activity 4.4
The teacher is requested to get the dilutesolution of the following chemicals from
his/her school laboratory or from anearby school: hydrochloric acid,
sulphuric acid, nitric acid, acetic acid,
sodium hydroxide, ammonium hydro-xide, calcium hydroxide (lime water).
Table 4.5
S. Name of acid Effect on Effect on Effect on
No. litmus paper turmeric paper China rose
solution
1. Dilute hydrochloric acid
2.
3.
Reprint 2024-25

ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 43
Stir the tube gently. Is there any change
in the colour of the solution? Continue
adding the sodium hydroxide solutiondrop by drop while stirring till the pink
colour just appears.
Now add one more drop of dilute
hydrochloric acid. What do you observe?The solution again becomes colourless.
Again add one drop of sodiumhydroxide solution. Is there any change
in colour? The solution again becomes
pink in colour.
It is evident that when the solution
is basic, phenolphthalein gives a pinkcolour. On the other hand, when thesolution is acidic, it remains colourless.
Fig. 4.4  Process of neutralisationDemonstrate the effect of the threeindicators on each of these solutions.Record your observations in Table 4.5.
4.3 N EUTRALISATION
We have learnt that acids turn bluelitmus red and bases turn red litmus
blue. Let us see what happens when an
acid is mixed with a base.
We are going to use an indicator you
have not used so far. It is calledphenolphthalein .
Activity 4.5
To be demonstrated by the teacher in
the class
Fill one fourth of a test tube with dilute
hydrochloric acid. Note down its colour.Note down the colour of phenolphthalein
solution also. Add 2–3 drops of theindicator to the acid. Now shake the test
tube gently. Do you observe any change
in colour of the acid?
Add to the acidic solution a drop of
sodium hydroxide solution by a dropper.Are you familiar with the term acid rain? Have you ever heard about damagingeffect of acid rain? As the name indicates the rain containing excess of acids is
called an acid rain. Where do these acids come from? The rain becomes acidic
because carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide (which are releasedinto the air as pollutants) dissolve in rain drops to form carbonic acid, sulphuric
acid and nitric acid respectively. Acid rain can cause damage to buildings,
historical monuments, plants and animals.
CAUTION
Great care should be taken whilehandling laboratory acids and basesbecause these are corrosive in nature,
irritating and harmful to skin.
Base
Acid + Indicator
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 44When an acidic solution is mixed
with a basic solution, both the solutions
neutralise the effect of each other. When
an acid solution and a base solution are
mixed in suitable amounts, both theacidic nature of the acid and the basic
nature of the base are destroyed. The
resulting solution is neither acidic norbasic. Touch the test tube immediately
after neutralisation. What do you
observe? In neutralisation reaction, heatis always produced, or evolved. The
evolved heat raises the temperature of
the reaction mixture.
In neutralisation reaction a new
substance is formed. This is called salt.Salt may be acidic, basic or neutral innature. Thus, neutralisation can be
defined as follows:
The reaction between an acid and
a base is known as neutralisation. Saltand water are produced in this process
with the evolution of heat.
Acid+Base  Salt+Water
     (Heat is evolved)
The following reaction is an example:Hydrochloric acid (HCl) + Sodium
hydroxide (NaOH) 
Sodium chloride (NaCl) + Water (H
2O)
Boojho added dilute sulphuric acid
to lime water. Will the reaction mixturebecome hot or cool?
4.4 N EUTRALISATION  IN EVERYDAY
LIFE
Indigestion
Our stomach contains hydrochloricacid. It helps us to digest food, as youhave learnt in Chapter 2. But toomuch of acid in the stomach causesindigestion. Sometimes indigestion
is painful. To relieve indigestion, we
take an antacid such as milk ofmagnesia, which contains magnesium
hydroxide. It neutralises the effect of
excessive acid.
Ant bite
When an ant bites, it injectsthe acidic liquid (formic acid) into theskin. The effect of the acid can be
neutralised by rubbing moist baking
soda (sodium hydrogencarbonate) orcalamine solution, which contains zinc
carbonate.
Soil treatment
Excessive use of chemical fertilisers
makes the soil acidic. Plants do notgrow well when the soil is either too
acidic  or too basic . When the soil is
too acidic, it is treated with bases like
quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked
lime (calcium hydroxide). If the soil
is basic, organic matter (compost) is
added to it. Organic matter releases
acids which neutralises the basic
nature of the soil.
Factory wastes
The wastes of many factoriescontain acids. If they are allowed to
flow into the water bodies, the acids
will kill fish and other organisms.The factory wastes are, therefore,
neutralised by adding basic
substances.
Reprint 2024-25

ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS 45
What you have learnt
Acids are sour in taste. Generally, bases are bitter in taste and soapy to
touch.
Acid turns blue litmus red. Bases turn red litmus blue.
Substances which are neither acidic nor basic are called neutral.
Solutions of substances that show different colour in acidic, basic andneutral solutions are called indicators.
An acid and a base neutralise each other and form a salt. A salt may beacidic, basic or neutral in nature.
Exercises
1. State differences between acids and bases.
2. Ammonia is found in many household products, such as window
cleaners. It turns red litmus blue. What is its nature?
3. Name the source from which litmus solution is obtained. What is the
use of this solution?
4. Is the distilled water acidic/basic/neutral? How would you verify it?5. Describe the process of neutralisation with the help of an example.
6. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
(i) Nitric acid turn red litmus blue. (T/F)
(ii) Sodium hydroxide turns blue litmus red. (T/F)
(iii) Sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid neutralise each other and
form salt and water. (T/F)
(iv) Indicator is a substance which shows different colours in acidic
and basic solutions. (T/F)
(v) Tooth decay is caused by the presence of a base. (T/F)
7. Dorji has a few bottles of soft drink in his restaurant. But, unfortu-
nately, these are not labelled. He has to serve the drinks on the demand
of customers. One customer wants acidic drink, another wants basicand third one wants neutral drink. How will Dorji decide which drink isto be served to whom?
8. Explain why:
(a) An antacid tablet is taken when you suffer from acidity.Keywords
Acid
Acidic
BaseBasicIndicatorNeutralNeutralisationSalt
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 46(b) Calamine solution is applied on the skin when an ant bites.
(c) Factory waste is neutralised before disposing it into the water
bodies.
9. Three liquids are given to you. One is hydrochloric acid, another is
sodium hydroxide and third is a sugar solution. How will you identify
them? You have only turmeric indicator.
10. Blue litmus paper is dipped in a solution. It remains blue. What is the
nature of the solution? Explain.
11. Consider the following statements:
(a) Both acids and bases change colour of all indicators.
(b) If an indicator gives a colour change with an acid, it does not give a
change with a base.
(c) If an indicator changes colour with a base, it does not change colour
with an acid.
(d) Change of colour in an acid and a base depends on the type of the
indicator.
Which of these statements are correct?(i) All four    (ii) a and d    (iii) b, c and d    (iv) only d
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Using the knowledge of acids and bases, write a secret message with
the help of baking soda and beet root. Explain how it works.(Hint:  Prepare baking soda solution in water. Use this solution to write
the message on a sheet of white paper with a cotton bud. Rub a slice of
fresh beet root over the message.)
2. Prepare red cabbage juice by boiling a piece of red cabbage in water.
Use it as an indicator and test the acidic and basic solutions with it.Present your observations in the form of a table.
3. Bring the soil sample of your area, find out if it is acidic, basic or
neutral. Discuss with farmers if they treat the soil in any manner.
4. Visit a doctor. Find out the medicines, he prescribes to treat acidity.
Ask him how acidity can be prevented.
Did you know?
Each cell in our body contains an acid, the deoxyribonucleic acid  or
DNA. It controls every feature of the body such as our looks, colour of
our eyes, our height etc. Proteins that build part of our cells are alsomade of amino acids. The fats in our body contain fatty acids.
Reprint 2024-25

