SCIENCE 142Forests: Our Lifeline12
One evening Boojho entered the
park with an elderly person. He
introduced him to his friends.
Prof Ahmad was a scientist working in
the university. The children started
playing while Prof Ahmad sat on a
bench in the corner. He was tired as hehad participated in the golden jubilee
celebrations of the town. After a while,
the children also came and sat aroundhim. They wanted to know about the
celebrations. Prof Ahmad told them that
after the cultural programme, thesenior people discussed the town’s
unemployment problem. A plan was
proposed to put up a factory by clearingan area of the forest just outside the
town. This would give the increasing
population of the town a chance to getjobs. The children were very surprised
when Prof Ahmad told them that many
people had objected to this idea.“This is because the forests serve as
green lungs and water purifying systems
in nature”, Prof Ahmad explained. The
children were confused. Prof Ahmadrealised that the children had not visited
a forest. The children also wanted to
know more about the forest, so theydecided to visit it with Prof Ahmad.
12.1 V ISIT TO A FOREST
One Sunday morning, the children
packed a few things like a knife, a hand
lens, a stick, a notebook and walkedtogether through a forest trail near a
village. On their way, they met Tibu, a
young boy of their age group, of nearbyvillage, who was taking cattle for grazing
along with his aunt. He was very agile,
running here and there to keep the herdtogether. When he saw the children,
Tibu also started walking along with
them, while his aunt went on a differentpath. As soon as they entered the forest
Tibu raised his hand and signalled them
to keep quiet because noise coulddisturb the animals living in the forest.
Tibu then took them to a place at a
height to show them the broad view ofthe forest. Children were surprised
because they could not see any land
(Fig. 12.1). The different treetops hadformed green cover over the land. However,
the cover was not uniformly green. The
Fig. 12.1  A view of a forest
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 143environment was peaceful and a cool
breeze was blowing. This made childrenquite fresh and happy.
While coming down, they got excited
on hearing a sudden sound of birds andsome noise from the top branches of the
trees. Tibu told them to relax since it
was a normal phenomenon here.Because of the children’s presence, some
monkeys had climbed higher up on the
trees where they disturbed the birds.Animals often give this type of warning
call to alert other animals. Tibu also told
that many other animals like boar,bison, jackals, porcupine, elephants live
in the deeper areas of the forest
(Fig. 12.2). Prof Ahmad cautionedchildren that they should not go deep
into the forest.
Boojho and Paheli remembered that
they have studied about forests as
Fig. 12.2  Some forest animals
Fig. 12.3  Forest as habitat
an example of a habitat in Class VI(Fig. 12.3). They could see now how the
forest provides a home for many animalsand plants.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 144The land where the children were
walking was uneven and covered with
many trees. Tibu helped them to identify
sal, teak, semal , sheesham , neem ,
palash , fig, khair , amla , bamboo,
kachnar (Fig. 12.4). Prof Ahmad pointed
out that there are several other trees,shrubs, herbs and grasses in the forest.
The forest floor and the trees were alsocovered with different types of creepersand climbers. The sun was barely visible
through the leaves of the trees, makingit quite dark inside the forest.
Activity 12.1
Observe the various things in your homeand make a list of those which are madefrom material which may have been
obtained from the forest.
You might have many wooden items
on your list like plywood, fuel wood,boxes, paper, matchsticks, and
furniture. Do you know that gum, oils,spices, fodder for animals and medicinal
plants are also some of the products
which we get from the forest (Fig. 12.5).Fig. 12.4  Some forest plants
Semal
Sheesham
Neem
Bamboo o
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 145Fig. 12.6  Some crown shapes
Based on the products that we get
from plants, try to fill Table 12.1. One
example of each plant is already given.
Fill the table by adding more examples.
Sheila wondered who would have
planted these trees. Prof Ahmad repliedthat in nature trees produce enough
seeds. The forest floor providesfavourable conditions for them to
germinate and develop into seedlingsProf Ahmad asked children to look
up and observe how the branches of the
tall trees look like a roof over the other
plants in the forest. He told them that
this is called a canopy (Fig. 12.7).
Activity 12.2
Visit a forest or a park in yourneighbourhood. Observe the trees and
try to identify them. You can take the
help of some elders or books on trees.List the characteristics of the trees that
you observe, such as the height, shape
of leaves, crown, flowers, and fruits. Alsodraw the crowns of some trees.
Prof Ahmad pointed out that trees
had crowns of different types and sizes.These had created different horizontal
layers in the forest. These are known as
understoreys (Fig. 12.7). Giant and talltrees constituted the top layer followed
by shrubs and tall grasses, and herbs
formed the lowest layer.
Table 12.1 Plants and their products
Gum Timber Medicinal Oil
Babool Sheesham Neem Sandalwood
Sealing wax
GumCatechu
Honey
Wooden
statue
Fig. 12.5  Forest products
and saplings. Some grow up into trees.He added that branchy part of a tree
above the stem is known as the crown
of the tree (Fig. 12.6).
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 146They had a close look at the bushes.
While doing that their hair and clothes
had seeds and thorns clinging to them.
They came across numerous insects,
spiders, squirrels, ants and variousother small animals on the bark of thetrees, plant leaves and on decaying
leaves on the forest floor (Fig. 12.8). They
started making sketches of thesecreatures. The forest floor seemed dark
coloured and was covered with a layer
of dead and decaying leaves, fruits,seeds, twigs and small herbs. The
decaying matter was moist and warm.
Children picked up various seeds and
leaves for their collection. Walking overthe dead leaf layer on the forest floor
was like walking over a spongy carpet!
Is the decaying matter always warm?
Prof Ahmad suggested that the childrencould perform an activity to get ananswer to this question.Fig. 12.7  Canopy and under storeys in a forest
“Would we see similar kind of trees
in every forest?”—asked Boojho.Prof Ahmad said, “No, due to different
climatic conditions there are variations
in the types of trees and other plants.The types of animals also differ from
forest to forest.”
A few children were busy watching
beautiful butterflies fluttering here andthere on the flowers of shrubs and herbs.Understorey
Fig. 12.8  Forest floorCanopy
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 147Fig. 12.9  Interrelationship of plant, soil and decomposers in a forest
Activity 12.3
Dig a small pit. Put vegetable waste and
leaves in it. Cover them with soil. Add
some water. After three days, remove the
upper layer of the soil. Does the pit feelwarm inside?
Paheli asked, “There are so many
trees here. Also, there are many forestlike this. What difference will it make if
we cut some trees for a factory?”
Prof Ahmad said, “You have read
about autotrophs, heterotrophs andsaprotrophs. You have learnt how green
plants produce food. All animals,whether herbivores or carnivores,depend ultimately on plants for food.Organisms which feed on plants oftenget eaten by other organisms, and so
on. For example, grass is eaten by
insects, which in turn, is taken by thefrog. The frog is consumed by snakes.
This is said to form a food chain:
Grass insects frog snake eagle.
Many food chains can be found in the
forest. All food chains are linked. If any
one food chain is disturbed, it affectsother food chains. Every part of the
forest is dependent on the other parts.
If we remove one component, say trees,all other components would be affected.”
Photosynthesis
SoilDecomposers
Oxygen
Carbon dioxide
WaterNutrients
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 148Paheli reminded Prof Ahmad that he
had not explained why forests are called
green lungs. Prof Ahmad explained that
plants release oxygen through the
process of photosynthesis. The plantshelp to provide oxygen for animal
respiration. They also maintain theProf Ahmad asked children to pick
up leaves from the forest floor andobserve them under a hand lens. They
found tiny mushrooms over the
decaying leaves. They also saw an armyof tiny insects, millipedes, ants andbeetle on them. They were wonderinghow these organisms live there. Prof Ahmad
explained that apart from these animals
which are easily seen, there are several
organisms and micro-organisms thatlive in the soil. Paheli wondered whatmushroom and other micro-organismseat. Prof Ahmad replied that they feedupon the dead plant and animal tissues
and convert them into a dark coloured
substance called humus .
In which layer of the soil would you
find humus? What is its importance tothe soil?
The micro-organisms which convert
the dead plants and animals to humusare known as decomposers . These
micro-organisms play an important rolein the forest. Soon, Paheli removed somedead leaves and discovered under thema layer of humus on forest floor.  The
presence of humus ensures that the
nutrients of the dead plants andanimals are released into the soil. Fromthere, these nutrients are again absorbedby the roots of the living plants. “Whathappens if an animal dies in the forest?”
Sheila asked. Tibu replied the dead
animals become food for vultures, crows,jackals and insects.” In this way, thenutrients are cycled. So, nothing goeswaste in a forest (Fig. 12.9).
Fig. 12.10  Balance of oxygen and carbon
dioxide
Paheli reminded their
friends that they have
studied photosynthesis in
Chapter 1.
balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere (Fig. 12.10). That is
why forests are called lungs.
The children saw clouds forming in
the sky. Boojho recalled what he hadlearnt about the water cycle in Class VI.
Trees take in water from their roots andrelease water vapour into the air
through evaporation.
If there were fewer trees, how will the
water cycle be affected?
Tibu told them that the forest is not
just home to plants and animals. Many
people also live in the forest. Some of
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 149them may belong to different tribes. Tibu
explained that these people dependmostly on the forests. The forest provides
them with food, shelter, water and
medicines. They have traditionalknowledge about many medicinal plants
in the forest.
While Boojho was drinking water
from a small stream, he saw some deer
crossing the stream (Fig. 12.11). They
disappeared into the bushes. The dense
bushes and the tall grass provide
animals with the food and shelter. Theyshowed the children droppings of some
animals, and explained the difference
between various types of droppings.
Prof Ahmad informed them that theforest officers could recognise the
presence of some animals in the forest
by their droppings and footprints.
Boojho called every one and showed
them a large, decaying heap of animaldropping. Several beetles and grubswere feeding on the heap and a bunch
of seedlings was sprouting. “These
seedlings are of the herbs and shrubs.
Paheli remembered that she
saw a Pipal sapling on the
sidewall in her school. Can you
help her to understand how this
would have happened?
Fig. 12.12  A sapling on a wall
also protect them from carnivores that
live in the forest.
Tibu then started looking closely at
the forest floor. Soon he called andThe animals also disperse the seeds of
certain plants and help the forest to growand regenerate. The decaying animaldung also provides nutrients to theseedlings to grow”, said Prof Ahmad.
After listening to this, Boojho noted
in his notebook, “By harbouring greatervariety of plants, the forest providesgreater opportunities for food andhabitat for the herbivores. Largernumber of herbivores means increased
availability of food for a variety ofFig. 12.11  Deer in a forest
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 150
carnivores. The wide variety of animals
helps the forest to regenerate and grow.
Decomposers help in maintaining the
supply of nutrients to the growing plants
in the forest. Therefore, the forest is a
‘dynamic living entity ’ — full of life and
vitality.”
It was about afternoon and the
children wanted to go back. Tibusuggested another route for going back.While they were going back, it started
raining. However, surprisingly, they saw
that the raindrops were not hitting the
forest floor directly. The uppermost layer
of the forest canopy intercepted the flow
of raindrops, and most of the water was
coming down through the branches and
the stems of the trees. From the leaves itFig. 12.13  Rainwater drips from the trees and seeps into the groundCovered ground with
decaying material actslike a spongeRain
The root system helpswater to seep down inthe groundThe closed canopy andmany layers of vegetationslow down the speed ofraindropsTranspiration and evaporation
Root system
Water table
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 151was dripping slowly over branches of the
shrubs and herbs (Fig. 12.13). They
found that the ground was still dry. After
about half an hour, the rain stopped.
They noticed that the layer of dead
leaves over the forest floor appeared wet
now. But water did not stagnate in the
forest.
Boojho thought that if it had rained
so heavily in his town, it would have
flooded the drains and roads.
What would happen if it rains heavily
in your town?
Prof Ahmad told them that the forest
also acts as a natural absorber of
rainwater and allows it to seep. It helps
maintain the water table throughout the
year. Forests not only help in controlling
floods but also help maintain the flow
of water in the streams so that we get a
steady supply of water. On the other
hand, if trees are not present, rain hits
the ground directly and may flood the
area around it. Heavy rain may also
damages the soil. Roots of trees normally
bind the soil together, but in their
absence the soil is washed away or
eroded.
The children spent an hour at Tibu’s
village on their way back. The weather
of the village was quite pleasant. Villagers
told them that due to the surrounding
forest, they receive good rainfall. The air
also remained cool. Noise pollution, too
is less because the forest absorbs the
noise of the nearby highway.
The children learnt about the history
of the village. It surprised them that the
villages and the agricultural fields ofthat area were created after clearing the
forest about sixty years ago. Tibu’s
grandfather told them that when he was
young, the village was not as large as it
was now. It was also surrounded
by forests. Construction of roads,
buildings, industrial development and
increasing demand of wood created
pressure on the forests and it started
vanishing. He was not happy that the
forest adjoining their village is not
regenerating and is on the verge of
disappearing due to overgrazing of
animals and indiscriminate felling of
trees. Prof Ahmad said that if we did
things wisely we could preserve forests
and environment as well as have
development.
Children prepared a few pictures to
show the consequences of such an
event.
At the end of the visit, Prof Ahmad
asked children to sum up the
importance of forests. The children
wrote: Forests provide us with oxygen.
They protect soil and provide habitat to
a large number of animals. Forests
help in bringing good rainfall in
neighbouring areas. They are a source
of medicinal plants, timber and many
other useful products. We must preserve
our forests.
What would happen if
forests disappear?
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 152
1 If forests disappear, the
amount of carbon dioxide in
air will increase, resulting inthe increase of earth’stemperature.
2 In the absence of trees and
plants, the animals will notget food and shelter.
3 In the absence of trees, the
soil will not hold water, whichwill cause floods.
4 Deforestation will endanger
our life and environment.Think, what we can do topreserve our forests.
4 321
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 153
What you have learnt
We get various products from the forests surrounding us.
Forest is a system comprising various plants, animals and
micro-organisms.
In a forest, trees form the uppermost layer, followed by shrubs.The herbs form the lowest layer of vegetation.
Different layers of vegetation provide food and shelter for animals,birds and insects.
The various components of the forest are interdependent on oneanother.
The forest keeps on growing and changing, and can regenerate.
In the forest, there is interaction between soil, water, air andliving organisms.
Forests protect the soil from erosion.
Soil helps forests to grow and regenerate.
Forests are the lifeline for the forest-dwelling communities.
Forests influence climate, water cycle and air quality.
Exercises
1. Explain how animals dwelling in the forest help it grow and regenerate.
2. Explain how forests prevent floods.3. What are decomposers? Name any two of them. What do they do in the
forest?
4. Explain the role of forest in maintaining the balance between oxygen
and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
5. Explain why there is no waste in a forest.6. List five products we get from forests?Keywords
Canopy
CrownDecomposersSeed dispersalSoil erosionUnderstoreyDeforestationHumusRegeneration
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 1547. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The insects, butterflies, honeybees and birds help flowering plants
in                       .
(b) A forest is a purifier of                         and                        .
(c) Herbs form the                         layer in the forest.
(d) The decaying leaves and animal droppings in a forest enrich the
                       .
8. Why should we worry about the conditions and issues related to forests
far from us?
9. Explain why there is a need of variety of animals and plants in a forest.
10. In Fig. 12.15, the artist has forgotten to put the labels and directions on
the arrows. Mark the directions on the arrows and label the diagram
using the following labels:
clouds, rain, atmosphere, carbon dioxide, oxygen, plants, animals, soil,
roots, water table.
11. Which of the following is not
a forest product?
(i) Gum
(ii)Plywood
(iii) Sealing wax
(iv) Kerosene
12. Which of the following
statements is not correct?
(i) Forests protect the soil
from erosion.
(ii) Plants and animals in
a forest are not
depedent on oneanother.
(iii) Forests influence the
climate and watercycle.
(iv) Soil helps forests to
grow and regenerate.
Fig. 12.15
Carbon dioxide
Oxygen
Reprint 2024-25

FORESTS : OUR LIFELINE 15513. Micro-organisms act upon the dead plants to produce
(i) sand (ii) mushrooms (iii) humus (iv) wood
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. The Department of Environment is to decide whether some portion of a
forest in your area could be cleared for a housing complex. Write a letter
to the department explaining your point of view as a concerned citizen.
2. Visit a forest. Here is a list of points that would make your visit more
fruitful.
(a) Make sure that you have permission to go into the forest.
(b) Make sure that you can find your way around. Get a map and go
along with some one who is familiar with the area.
(c) Keep a record of the things you see and do. Observations make
the visit interesting. Sketches and photographs are useful.
(d) You may record bird calls.
(e) Collect different kinds of seeds or hard fruits like nuts.
(f ) Try to recognise various types of trees, shrubs, herbs, etc. Make
lists of plants from different places in the forest and of different
layers. You may not be able to name all the plants, but it is worthrecording and seeing where they grow. Make a record ofapproximate heights of plants, crown shape, bark texture, leafsize, and flower colour.
(g) Learn to recognise the animal’s droppings.
(h) Interview the forest officials and the people of surrounding vil
lages and other visitors.
You must never collect birds’ eggs, and their nests should never bedisturbed.
You can read more on the following website:www.wild-india.com
Did you know?
In India the area under forest cover is about 21% of the total area. It had
steadily been falling since independence. But people now seem to haverealised the importance of the forest cover. Reports suggest that the areaunder forest cover has slightly increased in recent years.
Reprint 2024-25

