5
Every day you come across many
changes in your surroundings.
These changes may involve one
or more substances.  For example, your
mother may ask you to dissolve sugar
in water to make a cold drink. Making a
sugar solution is a change. Similarly,setting curd from milk is a change.
Sometimes milk becomes sour.  Souring
of milk is a change. Stretched rubberband also represents a change.
Make a list of ten changes you have
noticed around you.
In this chapter we shall perform some
activities and study the nature of thesechanges.  Broadly, these changes are oftwo kinds, physical and chemical.
Fig. 5.1   Paper pieces5.1  P HYSICAL  CHANGES
Activity 5.1
Cut a piece of paper in four square
pieces. Cut each square piece further
into four square pieces.  Lay these pieceson the floor or a table so that the pieces
acquire the shape of the original piece
of paper (Fig. 5.1).
Obviously, you cannot join the pieces
back to make the original piece, but isthere a change in the property of thepaper?
Activity 5.2
Collect the chalk dust lying on the floornear the chalkboard in your classroom.Or, crush a small piece of chalk into
dust. Add a little water to the dust to
make a paste. Roll it into the shape of apiece of chalk. Let it dry.
Did you recover chalk from the
dust?
Activity 5.3
Take some ice in a glass or plastic
tumbler. Melt a small portion of ice by
placing the tumbler in the sun. You havenow a mixture of ice and water. Now
place the tumbler in a freezing mixture
(ice plus common salt).
Does the water become solid ice once
again?
Physical and
Chemical Changes
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 485.3 and 5.4, water changed its state (from
solid to liquid, or from gas to liquid). InActivity 5.5, the hack-saw blade
changed colour on heating.
Properties such as shape, size, colour
and state of a substance are called itsphysical properties . A change in which
a substance undergoes a change in its
physical properties is called a  physical
change. A physical change is generallyreversible. In such a change no new
substance is formed.
Let us now consider the other kind
of change.
5.2  C HEMICAL  CHANGE
A change with which you are quitefamiliar is the rusting of iron.  If youleave a piece of iron in the open for some
time, it acquires a film of brownish
substance.  This substance is called rust
and the process is called  rusting
(Fig. 5.2). Iron gates of parks orfarmlands, iron benches kept in lawnsand gardens, almost every article of iron,
kept in the open gets rusted. At home
you must have seen shovels and spadesgetting rusted when exposed to theActivity 5.4
Boil some water in a container. Do yousee the steam rising from the surface of
water? Hold an inverted pan by its
handle over the steam at some distancefrom the boiling water.  Observe the
inner surface of the pan.
Do you see any droplet of water
there?
Activity 5.5
Fig. 5.2   Rusting ironCAUTION
Be careful while handling a flame.
Hold a used hack-saw blade with a
pair of tongs. Keep the tip of the free
end of the blade on the gas stove. Wait
for a few minutes.
Does the colour of the tip of the blade
change?
Remove the blade from the flame.
Observe the tip once again after some
time.
Does it get back its original colour?In Activities 5.1 and 5.2 above, you
saw that paper and a piece of chalk
underwent changes in size. In Activities
Reprint 2024-25

PHYSICAL  AND CHEMICAL  CHANGES 49light (Fig. 5.3). When it is completely
burnt it leaves behind a powdery ash.
Does the ash look like the
magnesium ribbon?
The change can be represented by
the following equation:
Magnesium (Mg) + Oxygen (O2) 
Magnesium oxide (MgO)
Fig. 5.3  Magnesium ribbon burning
atmosphere for some time. In thekitchen, a wet iron pan ( tawa ) often gets
rusted if left in that state for some time.
Rust is not iron.  It is different from iron
on which it gets deposited.
Let us consider a few more changes
where new substances are formed.
Activity 5.6
(To be demonstrated by the teacher)
CAUTION
It is dangerous to look for long at the
burning magnesium ribbon.  The
teachers should advise children notto stare at the burning ribbon.
Get a small piece of a thin strip or
ribbon of magnesium.  Clean its tip with
sandpaper.  Bring the tip near a candle
flame.  It burns with a brilliant whiteCollect the ash and mix it with a
small amount of water. Stir the mixture(aqueous solution) well. Test the mixturewith blue and red litmus papers.
Does the mixture turn red litmus
blue?
Does the mixture turn blue litmus
red?
On the basis of this test, how do you
classify the aqueous solution — acidic
or basic?
On dissolving the ash in water it
forms a new substance. This change canbe written in the form of the following
equation:
Magnesium oxide (MgO) + Water
(H
2O) Magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH)2]
As you have already learnt in
Chapter 4, magnesium hydroxide is a base.
So, magnesium oxide is a new substance
formed on burning of magnesium.Magnesium hydroxide is another newThe equations here are different from
those in mathematics. In equations
of this kind, the arrow implies‘becomes’. No attempt should be made
to balance chemical equations at this
stage.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 50
substance formed by mixing magnesium
oxide with water.
Activity 5.7
(To be demonstrated by the teacher)Dissolve about a teaspoonful of copper
sulphate (blue vitriol or neela thotha ) in
about half a cup of water in a glass
tumbler or a beaker. Add a few drops of
dilute sulphuric acid to the solution.
You should get a blue coloured solution.Save a small sample of the solution in a
test tube or a small glass bottle. Drop a
nail or a used shaving blade into theremaining solution. Wait for half an
hour or so. Observe the colour of the
solution. Compare it with the colour ofthe sample solution saved separately
(Fig. 5.4).colour of the solution from blue to
green is due to the formation of ironsulphate, a new substance. The brown
deposit on the iron nail is copper,
another new substance. We can writethe reaction as:
Copper sulphate solution (blue) + Iron
 Iron sulphate solution (green)
+ Copper (brown deposit)
Activity 5.8
Take about a teaspoonful of vinegar in
a test tube. Add a pinch of baking soda
to it. You would hear a hissing soundand see bubbles of a gas coming out.
Pass this gas through freshly prepared
lime water as shown in Fig. 5.5.
What happens to the lime water?
Do you see any change in the colour
of the solution?
Take out the nail or the blade.Has it changed in any way?
The changes that you notice are
due to a reaction between copper
sulphate and iron. The change ofThe change in the test tube is as
follows:
Vinegar (Acetic acid) + Baking soda
(Sodium hydrogencarbonate) 
Carbon dioxide + other substances
The reaction between carbon dioxide
and lime water is as follows:Fig. 5.4   Change in colour of the copper sulphate
solution due to reaction with ironCopper sulphate
(blue)Iron sulphate (greenish)
Reprint 2024-25

PHYSICAL  AND CHEMICAL  CHANGES 51Carbon dioxide (CO2) + Lime water
[Ca(OH)2] Calcium Carbonate
(CaCO3) + Water (H2O)
When carbon dioxide is passed
through lime water, calcium carbonate
is formed, which makes lime water milky.
The turning of lime water  into milky is a
standard test of carbon dioxide. You will
use it in Chapter 6 to show that the air
we breathe out is rich in carbon dioxide.
In Activities 5.6–5.8, you saw that
in each change one or more newsubstances were formed. In Activity 5.6,the ash was the new substance formed
when magnesium was burnt in air. In
Activity 5.7, the reaction of copper
sulphate with iron produced iron
sulphate and copper.  Both of these are
new substances. Copper was depositedon the shaving blade of iron. In Activity
5.8, vinegar and baking soda together
produced carbon dioxide, which turnedlime water milky. Can you name the new
substance formed in this reaction?A change in which one or more
new substances are formed is called a
chemical change . A chemical change
is also called a chemical reaction .
Chemical changes are very important
in our lives.  All new substances are
formed as a result of chemical changes.
For example, digestion of food in ourbody, ripening of fruits, fermentation of
grapes, etc., happen due to series of
chemical changes. A medicine is the endproduct of a chain of chemical reactions.
Useful new materials, such as plastics
and detergents, are produced bychemical reactions. Indeed, every new
material is discovered by studying
chemical changes.
We have seen that one or more new
substances are produced in a chemicalchange.  In addition to new products,the following may accompany a chemical
change:
Heat, light or any other radiation
(ultraviolet, for example) may be given
off or absorbed.
Sound may be produced.
A change in smell may take place or
a new smell may be given off.
A colour change may take place .
A gas may be formed.
Let us look at some examples.You saw that burning of magnesium
ribbon is a chemical change.  Burningof coal, wood or leaves is also a chemicalchange. In fact, burning of any
substance is a chemical change.
Burning is always accompanied byproduction of heat.Fig. 5.5  Set up to pass gas through lime water
Vinegar +
Baking sodaCarbondioxide
Limewater
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 52Explosion of a firework is a chemical
change. You know that such an
explosion produces heat, light, sound
and unpleasant gases that pollute the
atmosphere. That is why you are advisednot to play with fireworks.
When food gets spoiled, it produces
a foul smell. Shall we call this change achemical change?
You must have noticed that a slice of
an apple acquires a brown colour if it isnot consumed immediately. If you have
not seen this change in colour, cut a
fresh slice of apple and keep it away forsome time. Repeat the same activity with
a slice of potato or brinjal. The change
of colour in these cases is due to theformation of new substances. Are not
these changes chemical changes?
In Chapter 4, you neutralised an acid
with a base.  Is neutralisation a chemicalchange?5.3 R USTING  OF IRON
Let us get back to rusting. This is onechange that affects iron articles and
slowly destroys them. Since iron is usedin making bridges, ships, cars, truck
bodies and many other articles, the
monetary loss due to rusting is huge.
The process of rusting can be
represented by the following equation:
Iron (Fe) + Oxygen (O
2, from the air)
+ water (H2O)  rust (iron oxide Fe2O3)
For rusting, the presence of both
oxygen and water (or water vapour)is essential.
In fact, if the content of moisture in
air is high, which means if it is morehumid, rusting becomes faster.
So, how do we prevent rusting?
Prevent iron articles from coming incontact with oxygen, or water, or both.
One simple way is to apply a coat of
paint or grease. In fact, these coatsshould be applied regularly to prevent
rusting. Another way is to deposit a layer
of a metal like chromium or zinc on iron.A protective shield
You must have heard of the ozone layerin our atmosphere. It protects us fromthe harmful ultraviolet radiation which
come from the sun. Ozone absorbs this
radiation and breaks down to oxygen.Oxygen is different from ozone. Can
we call the breaking down of ozone a
chemical change?
If ultraviolet radiation were not
absorbed by ozone, it would reach theearth’s surface and cause harm to usand other life forms. Ozone acts as a
natural shield against this radiation.
We learnt in Chapter 1 that
plants produce their food by
a process called photosynthesis.
Can we call photosynthesis
a chemical change?
Paheli said that even digestion
is a chemical change.
Reprint 2024-25

PHYSICAL  AND CHEMICAL  CHANGES 53
Copper sulphate
CrystalsThis process of depositing a layer of zinc
on iron is called galvanisation . The iron
pipes we use in our homes to carry waterare galvanised to prevent rusting.
You know that ships are made of iron
and a part of them remains under water.On the part above water also, waterdrops keep clinging to the ship’s outer
surface. Moreover, the water of the sea
contains many salts. The salt watermakes the process of rust formation
faster. Therefore, ships suffer a lot of
damage from rusting in spite of beingformed from their solutions. The processis called crystallisation .  It is an
example of a physical change.
Activity 5.9
(To be performed in the presence of
the teacher)
Stainless steel is made by mixing ironwith carbon and metals like
chromium, nickel and manganese.  Itdoes not rust.
Oh, that is why my friend
Rita is always complaining
about iron articles rusting so
fast.  She lives near the coast.
CAUTION
Use only dilute sulphuric acid. Be
careful while boiling water.
painted. So much so, that a fraction of
ship’s iron has to be replaced every year.
Can you imagine the monetary loss to
the world?
5.4 C RYSTALLISATION
In Class VI you have learnt that salt canbe obtained by the evaporation of sea
water. The  salt obtained in this manner
is not pure and the shape of its crystalscannot be seen clearly. However, large
crystals of pure substances can beTake a cupful of water in a beaker
and add a few drops of dilute sulphuric
acid.  Heat the water. When it startsboiling add copper sulphate powder
slowly while stirring continuously
(Fig. 5.6). Continue adding coppersulphate powder till no more powder can
be dissolved. Filter the solution.  Allow
it to cool. Do not disturb the solutionwhen it is cooling. Look at the solution
after some time. Can you see the crystals
of copper sulphate?  If not, wait for somemore time.
Fig. 5.6  Crystals of copper sulphate
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 54You have learnt about physical and
chemical changes. Try to identifychanges that you observe around you
as physical or chemical changes.
What you have learnt
Changes can be of two types, physical and chemical.
Physical changes are changes in the physical properties of substances.
No new substances are formed in these changes.  These changes maybe reversible.
In chemical changes new substances are produced.
Some substances can be obtained in pure state from their solutions bycrystallisation.
Exercises
1. Classify the changes involved in the following processes as physical or
chemical changes:
(a) Photosynthesis
(b) Dissolving sugar in water(c) Burning of coal(d)  Melting of wax
(e) Beating aluminium to make aluminium foil(f ) Digestion of food
2. State whether the following statements are true or false.  In case a
statement is false, write the corrected statement in your notebook.
(a) Cutting a log of wood into pieces is a chemical change.  (True/F alse)
(b) Formation of manure from leaves is a physical change.  (True/F alse)Keywords
Chemical change
Chemical reactionCrystallisationGalvanisationPhysical changeRusting
Reprint 2024-25

PHYSICAL  AND CHEMICAL  CHANGES 55(c) Iron pipes coated with zinc do not get rusted easily.  (True/False)
(d) Iron and rust are the same substances.  (True/False)
(e) Condensation of steam is not a chemical change.  (True/False)
3. Fill in the blanks in the following statements:
(a) When carbon dioxide is passed through lime water, it turns milky
due to the formation of _________.
(b) The chemical name of baking soda is  _________.
(c) Two methods by which rusting of iron can be prevented are
_________ and  _________.
(d) Changes in which only  _________ properties of a substance change
are called physical changes.
(e) Changes in which new substances are formed are called  _________
changes.
4. When baking soda is mixed with lemon juice, bubbles are formed with
the evolution of a gas. What type of change is it?  Explain.
5. When a candle burns, both physical and chemical changes take place.
Identify these changes.  Give another example of a familiar process in
which both the chemical and physical changes take place.
6. How would you show that setting of curd is a chemical change?
7. Explain why burning of wood and cutting it into small pieces are
considered as two different types of changes.
8. Describe how crystals of copper sulphate are prepared.9. Explain how painting of an iron gate prevents it from rusting.
10. Explain why rusting of iron objects is faster in coastal areas than in
deserts.
11. The gas we use in the kitchen is called liquified petroleum gas (LPG). In
the cylinder it exist as a liquid. When it comes out from the cylinder it
becomes a gas (Change – A) then it burns (Change – B). The followingstatements pertain to these changes. Choose the correct one.
(i) Process – A is a chemical change.
(ii) Process – B is a chemical change.
(iii) Both processes A and B are chemical changes.
(iv) None of these processes is a chemical change.
12. Anaerobic bacteria digest animal waste and produce biogas (Change – A).
The biogas is then burnt as fuel (Change – B). The followingstatements pertain to these changes. Choose the correct one.
(i) Process – A is a chemical change.
(ii) Process – B is a chemical change.
Reprint 2024-25

SCIENCE 56(iii) Both processes A and B are chemical changes.
(iv) None of these processes is a chemical change.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Describe two changes that are harmful.  Explain why you consider them
harmful.  How can you prevent them?
2. Take three glass bottles with wide mouths.  Label them A, B and C.  Fill
about half of bottle A with ordinary tap water.  Fill bottle B with water
which has been boiled for several minutes, to the same level as in A.  Inbottle C, take the same boiled water and of the same amount as in otherbottles. In each bottle put a few similar iron nails so that they are com-pletely under water.  Add a teaspoonful of cooking oil to the water inbottle C so that it forms a film on its surface. Put the bottles away for afew days. Take out nails from each bottle and observe them. Explainyour observations.
3. Prepare crystals of alum.
4. Collect information about the types of fuels used for cooking in your
area.  Discuss with your teachers/parents/others which fuels are less
polluting and why.
Did you know?
Near the Qutub Minar in Delhistands an iron pillar (Fig. 5.7)which is more than 7 metreshigh. It weighs more than 6000 kg.It was built more than 1600 yearsago.  After such a long period it hasnot rusted. For its quality of rustresistance it has been examinedby scientists from all parts of theworld. It tells something about theadvances India had made inmetal technology as back as1600 years ago.
Fig. 5.7   Iron pillar
Reprint 2024-25

